S ca r ed
S c ar e d
A Novel on the edge of the world




    T o m D av i s
                                     SCARED
                            Published by David C. Cook
                                4050 Lee Vance View
                         Colorado Springs, CO 80918 U.S.A.

                       David C. Cook Distribution Canada
                55 Woodslee Avenue, Paris, Ontario, Canada N3L 3E5

                  David C. Cook U.K., Kingsway Communications
                   Eastbourne, East Sussex BN23 6NT, England

                     David C. Cook and the graphic circle C logo
           are registered trademarks of Cook Communications Ministries.

           All rights reserved. Except for brief excerpts for review purposes,
             no part of this book may be reproduced or used in any form
                    without written permission from the publisher.

This story is a work of fiction. All characters and events are the product of the author's
     imagination. Any resemblance to any person, living or dead, is coincidental.

                             LCCN [INSERT NUMBER]
                              ISBN 978-1-58919-102-0

                                 © 2009 Tom Davis
     Published in association with the literary agency of Alive Communications,
          Inc, 7680 Goddard St., Suite 200, Colorado Springs, CO 80920

                    The Team: Andrea Christian, Steve Parolini,
                 Amy Kiechlin, Jack Campbell, and Susan Vannaman
                          [Cover/design credits to come]

                        Printed in the United States of America
                                   First Edition 2009

                                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

                                          033009
            A Note from the Publisher
Dear reader,


The story you are about to read is very much based upon real life.
Some pages contain depictions of horror unimaginable to many of
us but are reality to some. It is a sad reminder that there is much
darkness roaming the globe. First John 1:5 reminds us that God is
light and there is no room in Him for darkness. In fact, one of the
dear characters in Scared, Pastor Walter, will reference this verse when
comforting a young Adanna who wonders if God is indeed present.
Given the abuse, poverty, death, and destruction that afflict so many,
one does wonder, "God, are You there?"
    The answer to that question can be found in countless thousands of
people who say in the affirmative, "Yes, He is here ... and He is light."
Child advocate and speaker Tom Davis gives us a gripping portrayal of
the hurt and pain that affects many in Africa. This story reminds us of
our need to be engaged in being light in a very dark world.
    Some scenes will grip and haunt you, some passages you will
want to run away from--but this is real life. And real life requires
true Christ followers to act justly and love mercy. May Adanna's story
inspire and embolden you.
                                                Thank you for reading,
                                                              Don Pape,
                                             Publisher, David C. Cook

                                   7
                           Prologue

432 234
    Adanna

The last thing I remember before going to sleep last night was the
pain in my gut and the question of what I would wear to church
this morning. These worries are for nothing, because I have no food
and only rags to wear. Today is Easter Sunday. Pastor Walter calls it
"Resurrection Sunday." A day of hope.
    I think about what hope means for the people in my village. I
try to imagine them rising up in glory, as Pastor says. But I only see
twisted bodies, bones poking out of paper skin. They do not rise.
They lie in mounds of yellow dirt. I think of my own body, wasting
away because I haven't eaten for days.
    Sometimes I wonder if the gods don't like me. Maybe it's because
I am dirty and stained, like old rags. I've been told by Pastor and
Momma, "Easter means new life." But our lives never change.
    Stepping outside my home, a shimmering road unfolds in front
of me. It is smooth, like a gift wrapped in gold.
    Voices from ahead call out to me, and one foot hurries to catch
the other. The sounds are beautiful, like a choir, their voices layered
in perfect harmony.
    I've never felt a road so smooth. It's like walking on cool water.
The roads I know are brown and rocky.

                                  9
1 0 T o m Da v i s




    A magical energy flows through every part of me from my feet to
my head, refreshing my tired body. How can something so unfamiliar
feel like home?
    But this place is nothing like home. The horizon blazes beautiful,
glowing colors--violet, blue, and amber dance like giddy fairies. The
land is on fire with color.
    I turn and see rows of trees taller than any I have ever seen. I
could swing from their branches. I would write poems about their
splendor. The leaves are leaping for joy. The apples hanging from the
trees look like red balloons. One could feed me for a week.
    Here, people do not pick up moon rocks and die.
    My throat is parched, so I run to the banks of a river. The
water is like crystal. It is so perfect I do not want to touch it, but
I cannot help myself. I cup my hands and thrust them down to
get a drink.
    When I pull out my hands, they are no longer brittle and cracked.
They appear soft, even glowing. My hands are new.
    Thirst spreads from my mouth to every cell in my body.
    I jump.
    I glide through the water like the colorful fish around me,
swimming free. Forgetting I am underwater, I suck in a breath. I
expect to choke, but I do not. Taking another breath whisks me out
of the water and onto the bank.
    The jagged scar on my arm has disappeared. I feel new. Not
hungry or sick. Even my scars on the inside seem to be gone.
    In the distance a marvelous light pulsates, lustrous, pure, and
white. What shines so warm and soft?
    "Adanna."
Scared                                                              11




    The voice sounds like a thousand mighty rivers, a thundering
boom. But I am not afraid.
    "Who are you? And how do you know my name?"
    "Adanna. Come closer."
    I move toward an illuminated man. He is sitting in a golden
chair. The music of many villages rises from where he sits. Love pours
out, giving life to the grass, the trees, and I feel it growing roots in
my heart.
    "Are you the ruler of this world?"
    "I am. This world and many others. I've waited a long time to
be with you."
    "I do not know who you are."
    "I have known you, Adanna," he chuckles, "for a very long time.
I have watched you grow. I have delighted in seeing you play, and
I have rejoiced over how you have matured. My love has always
surrounded you."
    Maybe he is one of my ancestors.
    "I'm not one on your ancestors, but you are one of mine."
    How did he hear me?
    "I do not think I have ever met you."
    "Oh, but you have. Come closer, Adanna. I want to show you
something."
    Cautiously, I step forward. He is inviting me with his smile. He
stretches out and opens his hand. On it there is writing.
    "That is my name, but how did it get there?"
    "I put it there."
    "But why?"
    "Because I have always loved you."
1 2 T o m Da v i s




    "But I am nothing special."
    "Adanna, if you only knew the greatness inside you. You must
trust me; I will draw out of you what the world needs to see. Here is
your gift. Use it wisely. It will make the way clear for you, and it will
save many of your people."
    He extends a white scroll made of lamb's skin and hands it to
me. I reach up and receive the scroll. "Thank you, sir. I am most
grateful. May I ask who you are?"
    "You will know, soon."
    "Can I stay here?"
    "Not now, but the time will come. Just remember this: No
matter where you go, I will be there to help you."
    "What is your name?"
    "Whatever You Need. That is my name."
    "I do not understand."
    I take the parchment in my hands. I untie a silk ribbon and
unroll it.
    My eyes open, and the thatched roof of my hut shudders in the
wind.
                        Chapter One
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Africa, 1998

Ten years ago I was a dead man.
    It all began when Lou, my broker from Alpha Agency, said,
"Stuart, how would you feel about heading to the Congo? Time is
putting together a crew and needs a hot photographer."
    He asked; I went. That's how I got paid then. It's how I get paid
now.
    My job was to cover a breaking story on a rebel uprising that would
soon turn into genocide. Unfortunately, neither Lou nor any of us were
privy to that valuable information at the time. We should have seen
it coming. The frightening tribal patterns resembled the bloodbath
between the Hutu and Tutsi in Rwanda in 1994. We knew what
happened there had spilled over to the DRC--but we ignored it.
    Our job was to focus on the story of the moment, whatever we
might find. But this was more than a search for journalistic truth. It
was an opportunity to win a round of a most dangerous game--the
chase for a prize-winning picture.


The plane landed in the capital city of Kinshasa. A man in combat
fatigues stood near a large black government car. Six armed guards
toting fully automatic rifles flanked him.

                                  13
1 4 T o m Da v i s




    "That must be the mayor and his six closest comrades," I said
to our writer, Mike, as I swung my heavy neon orange bag over my
shoulder. "Welcome to a world where you are not in control." This
was Mike's first international assignment. I swear his knees buckled.
    Our team consisted of me; Mike, shipped in from Holland (a lower
executive from Time who was looking for a thrill and trying to escape
his adulterous wife for a few weeks); and Tommy, the grip, whose job
it was to carry our gear.
    "Welcome to the Democratic Republic of Congo. I am Mayor
Mobutu." We introduced ourselves, exchanging the traditional French
niceties.
    "Bonjour, monsieur."
    "I must go and attend to some urgent matters, but there is a car
waiting for you. These guards will take you out to Rutshuru, North
Kivu."
    He pointed to a Land Cruiser near the airport building. The
mayor's face carried the scars of a rough life. His right cheek looked
as if someone tried to carve a Z into it. His left eye was slightly lazy,
giving you the feeling he was looking over your shoulder, even when
you were face-to-face.
    He turned to me. "You know how dangerous it is here. You are
taking your life into your own hands, and we will not be responsible.
We keep telling reporters this, but you never listen." He started to
walk away but turned one more time and wagged his finger at each
one us as if we were children. "Pay attention to what these guards tell
you, and do not put yourself in the middle of conflict."
    Nobody ever won a Pulitzer by standing at arm's length.
    "Thank you for welcoming us, sir, and for your words," I said.
Scared                                                            15




"We will keep them in mind." The guards nodded for us to follow,
and we made a solemn line into the Land Cruiser.
    It was the rainy season, and on cue an afternoon storm whipped
and lashed across the landscape like an angry mob. As we drove
in silence, the hair on the back of my neck stood straight up. We
arrived at the village that would serve as our headquarters. Amid the
familiar routines of a small community that seemed oblivious to the
dangers surrounding them, people who were displaced by violence
congregated in huddles hoping for safety.
    I snapped off pictures of the scene. Once the children noticed my
camera, school was over. They surrounded me like ants on a Popsicle.
I had come prepared. I handed out candy as fast as I could, then got
back to the business of capturing images of this unsettling normalcy.
    The sun hid behind the trees, and darkness enveloped the
thatched huts and makeshift refugee camp, swallowing them whole.
Our armed guards escorted us into a separate compound meant to
keep us safe from any danger lurking in the nearby jungles.
    We took a seat on concrete blocks to enjoy a traditional African
meal of corn and beans, and we laughed about the monkeys we had
seen on the road hurling bananas at our Land Cruiser. It was funnier
than it ought to have been.
    And then it happened.
    The crisp pop of bullets battered our eardrums. The sounds
ripped through the jungle night and into the village. Then the screams
began. Screams that boiled the blood inside my ears.
    I dropped, crawled on my belly to the window and slid up along
the front wall, craning my neck so I could see outside. A guard
across the room mirrored my actions at another window. Everyone
1 6 T o m Da v i s




else was flat against the ground. As I peered through the rusty barred
window, flashes of light pounded bright fists against the sky, the
road, and the trees.
    Buildings exploded with fire, and a woman cried out in terror.
Shadows flickered, black phantoms haunting the night. I made out
five or six soldiers beating a woman with their boots and the butts
of their guns.
    She quit screaming, quit moving, and then they ripped the
clothes from her broken body. They began raping her. She came to
and started to scream again, pleading for help, and they hit her until
her screams choked on her blood.
    She couldn't have been more than sixteen.
    I turned my head.
    The horror of this night was no act of God. No earthquake or
tsunami. This was the act of men. Evil men. Demons in the guise of
men.
    The uncertainty of what might happen next hovered at the edge
of an inhaled breath.
    The armed guards screamed for us to lay prostrate on the dirt
floor as bullets flew through the walls and widows, scattering plaster
and glass. I wiped away salty sweat burning my eyes. But the sweat
was thicker than it should have been. I tasted it.
    Blood.
    Fear strangled the air. Shallow breaths and rapid heartbeats echoed
throughout the tiny room. I thought about my last conversation
with Whitney.
    My last conversation.
    Was it my last?
Scared                                                           17




    Mike's hand slid up next to me. His whisper turned my head.
"Ask not for whom the bell tolls, man."
    Mike shoved his glasses back onto his oversized, pockmarked
nose. "This happened to one of my closest friends in Northern
Uganda. The rebel militia mutilated everyone and everything in
sight. No one made it out alive. No one. These monsters believe in a
kind of Old Testament extermination of anything that moves."
    "Thanks for the encouraging words."
    "I always knew I'd die young."
    He reached in his pocket and pulled out a string of wooden
rosary beads.
    "These were my mother's."
    "I'm not Catholic."
    "Neither was I. Until now...."
    "Shut up!" one of the guards hissed.
    Rivers of sweat baptized our faces, our necks, our chests.
    Death, real and suffocating, pressed in, driven by the wailing of
dying babies, the yelps of slaughtered animals, the screams of women
being beaten and raped.
    My heart raced in rapid-fire panic.
    I peered through a hole between a cinder block and a broken
windowsill. Rebel troops swarmed like locusts, devouring every
living thing in their path.
    Mike elbowed me in the thigh. "Remember that story about
an African militia group that raped a bunch of Americans? Men,
women, children--they weren't choosy."
    "You have to be quiet," whispered a guard. He got to one knee,
steadying his gun. "Now shut up, or I'll kill you myself."
1 8 T o m Da v i s




     A rebel commander yelled something just outside the door.
Another shot, and the guard who had just spoken fell dead right on
top of me. His blood flowed over my neck and right arm, staining
my band of brothers ring crimson. The screaming intensified, people
ran, yelled, and died.
     I scooted against the wall, huddled next to Mike as shots
continued to shriek overhead. Plaster exploded and covered us. We
tried to make ourselves invisible, curling into the fetal position,
wrapping our arms over our heads.
     A bullet whined by my ear, missing by centimeters. I crawled
facedown to the other side of the room, trying to get out of the line
of fire.
     Then a sudden, deafening silence.
     Nobody moved for what seemed like hours. Fear paralyzed me,
and the silence thickened, punctuated by an occasional moan or a
sob. We waited and waited, wondering when it would be safe to
stand, wondering if it would ever be safe.
     Finally, I gazed out the window, my eyes searching for rebel
soldiers in the yellow-orange gloom of smoke. No figures or
movement.
     "I'm going out," I whispered to Mike.
     He didn't respond
     "Hey, listen. Let's go, man."
     I elbowed him in the ribs.
     "Mike!" I grabbed his jacket to turn him toward me. There was
a pinpoint crimson stain on the front of his light blue shirt. His eyes
stared through me.
     I was frozen for a moment, not knowing what to do. Then I
Scared                                                           19




pulled my camera out of my bag. I picked up Mike's gear and slung
it around my neck.
    Outside, the air burned of flesh. Some shadows moved in the
distance, but the streets were barren. A few jerking and twitching
heaps lined the road and quivered beside the buildings.
    Oh, God. Oh, God.
    I walked toward the flames. Everything was silent except for
a sour ringing in my ears. Something compelled me to enter the
destruction, to get closer.
    Severed body parts lay before me in a display of such horror I
began to heave. A young pregnant mother crumpled over, lying dead
next to a burning haystack. She barely looked human. One leg lay at
a right angle, an arm hung loosely from her shoulder, held there by a
single, stringy tendon. Her stomach had been sliced wide open, the
wormlike contents spilled in front of her, still moving.
    There was nothing I could do to help her. Nothing.
    I lifted the camera to my left eye. Snap. Snap. Snap. The lens
clicked open and closed.
    I stepped closer to capture the look on her face. Steam rose from
her insides. More pictures. Through the blood and mucus by her
midsection I made out a face, a tiny face with eyes closed.
    Voices rose over the roofs. Something was happening at the end
of the village. Without thought, I raced through the corpses and
debris toward the commotion.
    The rebel troops had gathered the bodies of all the men they had
slain. They were stacking them together in the shape of a pyramid.
    As each body was thrown on top of the others, the rebels jeered,
spit on the dead, and drank from a whiskey bottle, reveling in their
2 0 T o m Da v i s




triumph. They shot their guns into the air. Fire flashed around the
perimeter. It was a scene from hell.
    A man climbed on the roof above the bodies, unzipped his pants,
and urinated all over the dead. The men slapped each other on the
back and laughed.
    Another rebel poured some liquid over the bodies.
    I adjusted the camera settings and snapped a series of shots as
fast as my fingers could click. The fire ignited, a pyramid pyre, and I
continued to shoot. I snapped pictures of the dead--men I had seen
earlier that day caring for their families--as their faces melted like
candle wax. I snapped pictures of the rebels' ugly glee. And I felt like
retching again.
    I turned and walked, faster and faster, until I was running.
    Each step I took pounded the question: Why? Why? Why?
    I raced to the edge of the compound and saw Tommy hanging
out the window of our car, frantically motioning me to come. We
sped off, the remaining guard driving like a bat out of hell, for it
was indeed hell we were escaping. As I turned to look out the back
window, I saw Mike's body crumpled in the seat behind me. Like a
rotted rubber band, something inside me snapped. My whole body
shook. Sobs came without tears. I could muster only one coherent
thought: If we get out of here alive, at least we can send Mike back
to his family.
    Back to his cheating wife.
                        Chapter Two
New York, 2007

As the cab rolls up to Madison Square Garden, my eyes immediately
catch the large flashing electronic sign that says "Welcome, guests of
the International Press Association." I take a deep breath, step out of
the cab, and force myself to walk in.
    The doors slide open as smooth as silk, revealing three cloth-
draped tables for guests to sign in and pick up their badges. Silver and
black balloons decorate the expansive foyer. Waiters and waitresses
swirl around the guests serving hors d'oeuvres and champagne. This
is New York. Everyone's a professional.
    A huge circle of flags on high golden posts lines the ceiling. I
scan for the countries I've visited: China, Russia, Turkey, Jordan....
Then my eyes rest on the flag with the red strip down the middle
with blue on each side and a yellow star in the top left. The Congo.
My forehead breaks out in a cold sweat.
    "Hello. You're Stuart Daniels, right?" I turn and see a tall blonde
with short, smooth hair. She is wearing a tight black dress with a
low-scooping neckline. It's hard to look at her face.
    "It's so great to meet you. I'm Kristin. I'm a massive fan of your
work. It's really powerful. Like, so moving."
    "Thanks. I'm grateful."

                                  21
2 2 T o m Da v i s




    Out of the corner of my eye I spot my friend Garrett heading
toward me. He's a waddling, sweating orb. Not much to look at, but
he's a great conversationalist--scary smart and a fantastic writer. He
stays local, likes the political scene. I always wondered if he wasn't so
big, maybe he could fit in an airplane seat and work internationally.
    "Congratulations on your award," Kristen says. She moves in
closer. "And if there's anything I can do for you tonight, here's my
card." I notice the Times logo as I glance at the card.
    Kristen takes my hand and bends a little lower, providing a clear
view of a glimmering silver cross and a tattoo in the shape of a heart
competing for my attention. Then I wonder if she really did pause
on the word anything.
    "Hey, Stuart." Garrett checks out Kristin as she walks away.
"She's hot. Did I interrupt something?"
    "Not at all. How are you?"
    "How am I? How are you? Ready for the big speech?"
    He's wearing a rented tuxedo with a black jacket and blue pants.
I start to say something about his fashion sense, but common sense
gets the better of me.
    "As ready as I'll ever be." I pick up the seating card with my table
number, and Whitney's.
    "Where is the lovely Whitney tonight?"
    "She's doing production for CBS Live at Five news. She should
be here any minute."
    "That's a great promotion for her. Man, she's the real thing. You
need to hang on to her, dude. She's your salvation." His eyes shift to
look beyond me. "And speak of the angel in blue ..."
    I turn and see Whitney gliding toward us in a light blue strapless
Scared                                                               23




dress. She is wearing the necklace and earrings I picked up for her in
Egypt last month. Whitney isn't flashy with clothes or makeup, but
she does love exotic jewelry.
    "And hello, Ms. Whitney. You're looking gorgeous tonight,"
Garrett says.
    "Her face isn't down there, man."
    "Listen, Stuart, I know a good thing when I see it."
    Whitney can take it. She grew up with three brothers--and she's
known Garrett as long as she's known me.
    "Hello, Garrett, good to see you." She puts her arm around me
and leans in to kiss me. She smells like orange and vanilla. The scent
reminds me of better times. I inhale slowly, willing myself to relax.
    "You look incredible." I mean it. The dress matches her eyes. The
color of a winter sky.
    "Whitney, I know this guy's won some kind of prestigious award,
but if you want a real man to take you out after this, let me know, would
ya?" Garrett's eyebrows jump up and down like two caterpillars in heat.
    The thought of it makes us laugh. Garrett has always had a crush
on her.
    "I'm heading to the lav." Garrett points to the opposite side of
the room. "See you at the table."
    A voice to my right yells, "Congratulations, Stuart! The Horace
Greeley Award for public-service journalism, what an honor!"
    I recognize the face. Couldn't pull the name if my life depended
on it though.
    "Thanks." I hate these cocktail preludes. I turn to Whitney. "I
need a drink."
    "All this attention a bit much for you?"
2 4 T o m Da v i s




    "Thus, the drink. And you need one too." I put my arm around
her narrow shoulders and we walk, trying to stay under the radar.
    I get her a white wine, dry, and a Stoli and lime for myself. It
doesn't even begin to touch my nerves.
    "I'm proud of you, Stuart. This is a big night for you," Whitney
says.
    Now that we're out of the main foyer, I feel like I can let my
guard down.
    "You know, Whit, this all seems incredibly strange."
    "What do you mean?"
    "It just doesn't seem right that I should get an award for this. That
day in the Congo wasn't an act of courage, more like desperation."
    "Look, that picture did something. It changed people's lives.
And it did something to change the world. Stuart, just try to enjoy
this, okay?"
    We've had this conversation before, and I can tell she is getting
exasperated.
    "Okay." She squeezes my hand and turns to talk to the woman
sitting next to her. Whitney is patient with me, but only to a point.
She's the kind of girl who cried over an A- in school, and she's
climbed the broadcast-journalism ladder faster than most people her
age. She's a Georgia country girl with little tolerance for weakness.
    I order another drink.
    I haven't been able to sleep since I found out about this award.
The same nightmares I had after coming home have reemerged from
some closet in my psyche. Dr. Brandon, my shrink, upped my meds
and gave me something to help me sleep, but my nerves have been
shot for weeks.
Scared                                                                25




    I unfold the paper in my pocket where I scratched out an
acceptance speech on the way over tonight. Cab rides are good for
something, I guess.
    Chairs shuffle and squeak across the floor like dozens of metal
monsters as people take their seats. A large man crosses the stage and
raspily clears his throat. The emcee for the evening. Looks familiar.
Ah yes, Charlie Swanson, CNN news anchor.
    "Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome. We are glad
you are able to be with us tonight on this very special occasion, one
where we honor those among us who have gone above and beyond
the call of duty and accomplished something truly worthwhile...."
    As the night wears on and people are given awards they most
certainly deserve, my mind wanders. I can't accept that some good
came from this picture. It's a picture that I can't escape. But it's not
just the picture of the dead men I see when I close my eyes. I also see
the young woman I had spied through the window, the blows hitting
her body, the heinous rape. I see the pregnant woman's broken body.
And then I see the innocent eyes. I don't see them as they were. I see
them open, alive, looking at me. They are pleading, and I can do
nothing. I start to feel a wave of panic. I tug at my collar and wish I
could run.
    Whitney must sense this. She reaches over and squeezes my
hand.
    "I'm going to wait over there." I point to the side aisle. As I stand,
someone sitting near the stage catches my eye. I see the African head
wrap, and I know.
    The emcee continues.
    "Making the presentation of the Horace Greeley Award for
2 6 T o m Da v i s




public-service journalism is a very special guest. We are honored she
has accepted our invitation. This is a woman who has given her life
in service to the poor and made our world a better place at great
personal sacrifice. She is the recipient of the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize
and the first African female to receive that award. Please welcome
with me, Mrs. Wangari Maathai."
    I fall back into my seat and my hand stops midair, sending the
ice cubes in my nearly finished glass of water cascading onto the
table. Stepping up onto the stage is my friend, a woman who bleeds
African royalty. Wangari, in her vibrant dress and multicolored head
wrap, walks gracefully to the podium and takes the microphone.
A bead of sweat falls from my forehead onto my program. How
fitting that a woman who was with me in the firefight all those years
ago--though I didn't know it till we met months later--is the one
sharing this moment with me now.
    "Thank you, and good evening to everyone. Ladies and
gentlemen, I am proud to be presenting our next award. As many
of you know, this is one of the most prestigious awards anyone
can receive in journalism. Men and women make many personal
sacrifices and take great risks just to be considered. Past recipients
have even lost their lives, but their sacrifices live on through this
award."
    The photo appears on the overhead screens: Pyramid of Death. I
don't need to look at it to see it.
    "Tonight, I am proud to present this award to a man I admire,
one who will take his place among his colleagues in this hall of
courage. Through his decade of work, he has become a champion for
the poor and oppressed in many nations of the world. I am proud
Scared                                                               27




to call him a brother and a friend. The winner of this year's Horace
Greeley Award for public-service journalism, Mr. Stuart Daniels!"
    I'm not sure if it's the moment, the alcohol, or my state of shock,
but I freeze. My butt won't move out of my chair. The clapping
intensifies, louder and louder. Then, one by one, everyone begins
to stand. Now, I'm the only one sitting. A torrent of emotion rushes
through my soul, emptying me. I stand. Everything is in slow motion
now. I'm shaking, putting one foot in front of the other. Finally, I
reach the platform.
    "Thank you, everyone, for this great honor. I want you to know
that I don't accept this award lightly. In fact, many sleepless nights
have followed me since the night that picture was taken."
    Looking back at the photo, I pause, caught by the immediacy of
the image. Why did they have to blow it up so huge on the screen? A
moment passes. Then another. I swallow hard.
    "A friend, a writer, lost his life that day. The men in that picture,
I talked to some of them that day. They had come to this place of
refuge with their wives, their children. They were reconstructing life
as best they could in a camp. And then the rebels came."
    I've forgotten about the speech I wrote. I pull the paper out of
my pocket and unfold it. The room is silent.
    "All I can say, is ..." I look at Wangari.
    "This award isn't really my award. It belongs to the people who
died for it. And to those who are changed for the better because of
my work. And so, on their behalf, I'll accept it. And I thank you from
the bottom of my heart."
    Wangari hands me the award, a tall crystal trophy--so clean, so
pristine. So unlike the image that won it for me. Then she embraces
2 8 T o m Da v i s




me and whispers in my ear, "You're a good man, Stuart. I've always
known that about you. One day you'll believe it too." I try to pull
away but she holds on.
    My head weighs a hundred pounds and it falls onto her shoulder.
I weep. It's all I know to do.
                      Chapter Three

432 234
    Adanna

The red clay from the ground sticks like gum to my bare, blistered
feet. My stride is long and elegant like a giraffe. The water explodes
as each foot lands in a muddy puddle. I'm running as fast as my feet
will take me.
    The sun is dipping down. The countryside radiates as far as my
eye can see, and the sounds of life vibrate through the rocks. I love
the silence and the appearance of twinkling stars. The cool night
air smells different, like a freshly whittled stick. My breath slows,
and I walk to the sound of crickets, their love songs rising into the
night.
    A few moons ago, I was walking in the night and I heard men's
voices shouting in the distance. I followed the sound to the kraal.
This is a place of meeting where important decisions are made. It is
also where the spirits of our ancestors dwell. I was taught at school
the importance of the kraal, how the spirits who live in the trees
and the air give our leaders wisdom. I tiptoed through the grass and
hunched down in the middle of the circle of brambly trees.
    What I found was more valuable than gold: secrets! I felt like
the most important girl in all of Africa. I heard about someone who
was in trouble with the council. A man in our village had land taken

                                 29
3 0 T o m Da v i s




away because he stole a neighbor's cow. I discovered who would face
trial by the council for neglecting members of their own family, and
what sentence should be handed down to a man who was found
guilty of killing a fellow villager because the villager stole five of his
cows. In our culture, cows are everything.
    My mother often calls me "the little spy."
    "How do you know such things, Adanna?" she would ask and
laugh. I would smile and shake my head. But I never gave away my
secret.
    Tonight, I am wandering outside alone with my thoughts,
walking toward the kraal, and thinking about Momma, who is at
home trying to get some rest. Precious and Abu are asleep, dreaming
of candy, I am sure. It is better for them to sleep when there is no
dinner. I can't help but think of the burnt corn we ate two nights
ago. My mouth waters for more. When the food is cooked, some
always burns. We scrape the kettle to save the char for days when
there is nothing else to eat--but now that is gone too. I try not to
think of the ache in my stomach, but it's almost impossible. I think
the reason Momma rests all the time now is because of the ache in
her stomach. Whenever there is food, she gives it to Abu first, then
Precious, then me.
    I can see every star in the universe. The sky is a deep blue bowl
filled with magical, milky fairy dust. My mother told me that fairies
live in the stars. The brightest ones are the most powerful. I dream
one of those fairies will find me and give me three wishes.
    I first would wish to see my real daddy again, the way he used to
be, and have him home with us. The second would be lots of food so
nobody in our village would ever get hungry. And the third would
Scared                                                               31




be wings, so I could fly away.... No, not wings. I don't need to fly.
The third wish would be that no one in our village would ever get
sick again.
    My thoughts are interrupted by a familiar name. "Sipo." My
uncle's name. Quietly, I wade through the dry, crackling grass near
the kraal and lean forward to listen.
    "We have to act. Something has to be done," says a deep voice.
    "Would you have us remove all the sick to one building and just
let them die alone, Bongani?"
    "There are just too many of them. And now the sickness has
attacked our elders and our children."
    Something is moving on the other side of the kraal. I hear sticks
snapping.
    "Yes, it is a terrible thing that Sipo has fallen sick. It seems like
yesterday he was fit as a lion."
    What is that noise? I'm certain I hear the breathing of an animal.
My face is burning hot, and I wonder if every creature on the plains
can hear the pounding of my heart. I am as still as a snake under a
bush.
    "Now, Sipo has the look of the dead. No doubt he will soon join
our ancestors and everyone else who have gotten the sickness. He
will die."
    "Listen to me, my brothers. Sipo, and all who have died before
him, have made the ancestors angry and punishment is the result.
This punishment will continue to fall on us until the ancestors are
appeased. We must offer a blood sacrifice."
    I can hardly concentrate; something is peering around the corner.
It is no animal, but a person.
3 2 T o m Da v i s




    "Yes, then let's agree. A blood sacrifice on the first night of the
next full moon."
    I can see now. Cloaked in the shadows is my best friend, Tobile.
My hand snaps to my lips to silence her.
    "This must be kept secret," the same low voice says. "Bongani
and I will seek the witch doctor."
    "Then it is agreed." It is the voice of the chief. "We will seek the
witch doctor and follow her instructions."
    Tobile scoots my direction and huddles by my side. We peek
through the wood encircling the kraal. Shadows move about,
flickering by torchlight. Shivering, we look at each other and know
we are forbidden to whisper a word. The voices fade to a low hum,
and everyone slips away. Once the elders have spoken and the chief
makes a decision, there is no more talk.
    My head is buried in my arm. I wish I could be invisible. Of all
nights, Tobile should not have come. This is a dark matter, and we
both know it. We sit, stiff with fear.
    After enough time passes, I tap Tobile's shoulder.
    "Let's get out of here."
    She nods, and we steal away like robbers into the night.
    We run to my home. I can see a lonely candle flickering in the
window. I remember the days when I would open the door to our
house and find it filled with laughter and food. Uncle Sipo would
come with his family, and we would play games. Our house was fun.
But that was long ago.
    Thinking about my uncle brings me to tears. I cannot imagine
life without him. Tobile and I crouch down in front of our house
where we cannot be seen.
Scared                                                              33




    "Adanna, what is happening? Why are the elders talking about
blood?" Tobile asks.
    "So many of our people are sick, and everyone is scared,
Tobile."
    "Why?"
    "Our ancestors are angry because Uncle Sipo did not honor
them. Someone said he made enemies with the witch doctors. I do
not know what is happening, but the dead are filling the ground
faster than the living can make graves for them."
    I pull my legs in and hug my knees tighter. It is cold again
tonight, and I will have to find more wood for us to stay warm.
    "I wish I hadn't learned this secret."
    Tobile kneels close beside me. "Adanna, why do you think Sipo
is sick?"
    "Something is happening to our village, Tobile." I can't stop the
queasy feeling in my stomach.
    "Why?"
    "Someone was talking the other day about the moon rocks. They
fell from the sky and landed next to the village. That's what they said.
The moon rocks are making people sick. Maybe if we can bury the
moon rocks, we can save our people."
    "Maybe no one would have to spill their blood."
    Suddenly the door opens. Momma peeks out.
    "You two children running all over the country at night? Shame.
Tobile, you get home right this minute, and, Adanna, get in this
house, girl."
    I whisper, "Tobile, we will look for the rocks first thing in the
morning. The lives of our people depend on it."
                         Chapter Four
New York, 2008

The airport Starbucks is like heaven. Of course, the line's a mile long.
At least I have some time before my flight.
    "I'll take a grande drip of the day with a shot of espresso,
please."
    A young woman with a sizable lip ring takes my order. Blood
still circles the steel of the recent piercing.
    "Room for cream?"
    "Nope."
    I start to imagine blood dripping in my coffee, and then I stop
myself. I'm far too hungover for that line of thought.
    "Can I offer you one of our crème brûlée chocolate caramel
fudge bars to go with that?"
    I look at her dirty fingernails and hand littered with not-quite-
faded X stamps from the clubs she hit the night before and shake my
head.
    "No, thanks. But I will take a tall caramel macchiato, half the
syrup, with lots of whip." For Whitney. She called last night and
asked if she could meet me at the airport. I'm sure she could tell from
my response I wasn't too keen on the idea. I don't need yet another
reminder of my growing list of failures.

                                    34
Scared                                                                   35




    I sit alone at a table for two. I can't believe I'm going back to Africa.
I hate everything about it; the heat, the poverty, the corruption, the
ignorance, the death that blows over the place like a dry western
wind. Where's that Ebola virus when you need it? A breakout would
give me a good reason to cancel.
    At least I'm still good at leaving town. With a flick of my wrist
and a twitch of my nose, things fall into place and I'm out the
door. I can become someone else for a time. Or maybe I become
myself--someone who cares just enough to get the work done but
not enough to get sucked into the broken lives I'm capturing on film.
All I need are some clothes, toiletries, books, a little Airborne, my
computer, cameras, and prescription drugs. Too bad they don't give
international awards to the fastest packer. At least winning that one
wouldn't screw with my head.
    I have to admit, though, that traveling isn't quite what it used to
be. These crowds make me anxious. The best thing about 9-11 was
that it cleared out the airports. I know it was a horrible tragedy, but
something good comes from everything.
    "Stuart, what are you thinking so intently about?"
    Whitney is wearing her black jogging suit. Her cheeks are still
flushed from her Saturday run in the park. Something we used to do
together. If she wasn't so incredibly beautiful, maybe I could leave for
good. And we could both just go on with our lives.
    "Trying to get mentally prepared for my trip."
    "Sorry I'm late. Traffic was a mess. Big surprise. I don't know
why I don't move back to the country."
    "Because you hate the country, and you would never become a
network exec if you moved back to sticksville." I hand her the drink.
3 6 T o m Da v i s




She gives me a look that straddles the line between "what's this for?"
and "thank you." She takes a sip. Her expression settles on "thank
you" but stops short of a smile.
    "You know me too well."
    "What are we doing, Whit? I mean ... what am I doing?"
    "Only you can answer that." She doesn't look away. She seems to
be searching for answers I don't think exist. "I know what I want you
to do," she says, "but I can't force that."
    "I know."
    "I made a commitment to you, Stuart. I thought you made the
same sort of commitment to me."
    "I did. But ..."
    "But what? But it's not working out like you planned? Look ...
I'm sorry you're having a hard time with all this. I know this is tough
on you. But it's tough on me, too. You seem to have forgotten there
are two of us in this relationship."
    "I haven't forgotten." But there were days when I wish I had.
Not because I didn't love Whitney, but because I didn't think I
deserved her. Not anymore. Not since I had become a failure, unable
to get out of bed, bowing out or flaking out on assignments other
photographers would kill for. Then the assignments stopped coming
altogether. Until this one. One I didn't want.
    "Stuart, I wanted to meet with you before you leave because--"
She starts to cry. She's never been a crier. I can't help but think she's
about to give me the final hatchet. God knows I deserve it.
    "I love you. I still love you. But you've been so far away, Stuart.
I want you back. I need you to come back to me. I need the Stuart
I married."
Scared                                                                  37




    She reaches over to grab my hands.
    "I don't know that man anymore." It is the truth.
    For a moment, she looks ready to give up on me. Her words
speak of love, but her eyes are filled with pain and frustration.
    "Stuart ... I've been praying for you--for us."
    "You've been praying? I thought you swore off the God of the
South."
    "I did, but I've since realized the God who shames and demands
isn't the real God, Stuart."
    "When did this change happen?"
    She grinds her teeth, grips my hands tighter. "Stuart ... it's been
happening for a while. You just haven't been listening."
    There's the understatement of the year.
    "I'm sorry," I say. "You're right. I've been somewhere else for
weeks."
    "Months," she corrects.
    "But I just don't see how God figures into any of this."
    She softens.
    "I'm not sure I understand either, Stuart. But I know He does.
Somehow I know that. And ..."
    "I am so tired of my thoughts, Whit. I feel like a character in a
Shakespearean play who went on stage, acted their one great scene,
and died."
    "... and I think this trip is really important for you. For us."
    What?
    "You think this trip is a good idea? I thought you hated it."
    "I do hate it. I hate that you don't get all the great assignments
that you deserve. I hate it that this feels like a last-ditch effort to save
3 8 T o m Da v i s




your career. And I truly hate it that it takes you away from me when
we're in such an uncertain place."
       "But somehow, you think it's important for me to go?"
       "Yes." She lets go of my hands and takes a long sip of her drink.
"I can't explain it. It's just something I feel. I know."
       "I wish I knew it."
       "You're still very much alive, Stuart. You just need to remember
who you are."
       I think of Wangari's words, Someday, you will realize who you
are.
       "I don't know what to say." I glance at my watch. "I've gotta
go."
       Our chairs squeak back, and she comes to me with her eyes
squinting and her forehead wrinkled. She holds me tight, "Find the
answer, Stuart. Please."
       She turns to leave, then stops and looks back.
       I try to smile but manage what probably looks more like a sneer.
She turns quickly and walks away.
       Does she know I still have thirty minutes till boarding? I walk
toward the gate. I need some time to think. Or maybe time to think
of nothing at all.
       A few splits of wine and an Ambien will help with the latter.
                        Chapter Five

432 234
    Adanna

My name means "father's daughter." But memories of my father are
few. My mother tells me he was an important man. I do not know if
that is true, but I do know he was gone all the time. Sometimes that
made me sad. Other times, I was glad.
    My strongest memory of him was when we had our last family
brii. Every brii before that one, Daddy and Uncle Sipo and all the
men would fish from the river while Momma and Auntie got the
food and fire ready at home. But on that last brii, Daddy took me
fishing with him too.
    Daddy wanted his firstborn to be a boy. Instead, he got me.
Since I was the oldest and Abu just a baby, he sometimes treated me
like a boy. I did not mind.
    Early that morning, my father and I walked five kilometers to
the river. Trees and flowers bloomed in every direction. Explosions of
color ignited the landscape. The bugs were everywhere that morning
too, and they were eating me alive. When we got to the river, the
grass all around was thick and green. Those weeds made a perfect
place to play hide and seek.
    Back then, the river was so clean you could drink out of it. The
river settled me and gave me a feeling of peace.

                                 39
4 0 T o m Da v i s




    "Adanna, come here and help me put a worm on this hook."
    "Oh Daddy, must I?" I hated the slimy feeling of those worms.
And I could not stand to see their guts squish out all over the place.
    As much as I wanted to show my father I was as good as any
son, these kinds of things I didn't like. Our village celebrated special
occasions and funerals by slaughtering an animal. The whole town
would gather and people would crane their necks to see as if they
were watching the South African soccer team play in a world-
championship match. Everyone watched with anticipation as the
glimmering knife came down and slit the poor creature's throat. I
kept my eyes closed the entire time.
    "If you were a boy ..."
    I had heard this speech a hundred times. If I were a boy, I could
catch the fish while father was preparing the brii. If I were a boy, I
could make money to help support the family. I didn't mind the
speech because when it was over, he would look at me with a huge
smile and say, "But, Adanna, I wouldn't trade you for every boy in
Africa!" In these moments, my father was a wonderful man, better
than any man in the world.
    "Now, Adanna, what kind of meal is there with nothing to eat?
Go on, put the worm on the hook."
    Gingerly, I pressed the worm onto the hook, its string of guts
squishing out on each side.
    We caught fish by the dozens that day. Their bellies were painted
with the colors of the rainbow. My father and I laughed together until
my stomach hurt as he told me jokes and as I tried to get the slimy,
icky fish off the hooks and into the bag. We wrestled together in the
tall grass until my back itched like a million bugs were scratching me.
Scared                                                              41




        When we arrived back home, I held the bag of fish high above
my head and skipped to the front yard. Momma and auntie clapped
wildly for me like I had just scored the winning goal in a soccer game.
It felt good to contribute to the family by working and catching the
fish.
        That night, Dad shared stories about his trips to the big cities
like Durban, Cape Town, and Johannesburg. He was a truck driver
and saw all of Africa on his journeys. He promised he would take
me with him one day. I can still see his face, like Abu's. Same chin,
same jaw line. As he animated his stories with wild gestures, his face
seemed to glow next to the fire. Every few minutes, he would have
to stop as a cough overtook him. That's the last image I have of him,
coughing by the fire, sweat dripping down his brow. He was going
away the next day on a long trip to make lots of money. He was
going to bring back exotic foods and candies from all over Africa. He
said after this trip, he would have so much money he would never
have to leave again.
        But I never saw him again. I was only ten years old.


                                12345-54321
"Adanna, let's run to the river and play in the trees!"
        "Okay, Tobile, I'll race you there!"
        We don't mention the moon rocks. Maybe our secret games will
make me feel better. The river was our source of life. Crystal clear and
pure, filled with fish, it was a peaceful place of refuge.
        After my daddy left, everything changed. More and more people
became sick, hiding in their homes, never to be seen again. The next
thing I knew, we were burying them in the ground.
4 2 T o m Da v i s




    Now, instead of green grass and trees, the ground is covered with
thorns and trash--glass, garbage bags, and tin cans. The river smells
like an outhouse. And when you run close to the banks, you have to
watch so you don't step on something and cut your foot.
    Momma and Auntie tell us all the time, "Do not drink that
water, not even a sip, or you will get sick and die!" Everyone used to
drink it all the time. But now, the river's edge is dotted with small
mounds were people have been put in the ground. I've heard the
elders in the kraal say the river is poisoned.
    There is not so much water now. The river is more like a creek.
But I still like to come here to think or be alone. Today I am thinking
of Uncle Sipo. This morning I went to visit my auntie Zoda. She
stood outside in the wind and the dust refusing to let me inside. She
didn't want me to see him.
    "I don't know if he will make it through the night," she said.
    It used to be the elders did not talk to children about serious
matters.
    Tobile and I grew up playing with each other before we could
even walk. Our mothers carried us on their backs in a knapsack
called a Kanga. When they were close, we would grab and hug
each other as they talked and cooked. Our bond is one only sisters
share.
    To cook, a woman stands over a hot iron pot forever. I know
because this is my job when Momma is tired. We only eat a few times
a week. There is not enough food for more than that.
    Mostly we eat pap, a yellow corn mixture with a few beans, if we
are lucky. We build a fire from branches that are becoming harder to
find. Then the kettle sits on top until everything is ready. Pap is not
Scared                                                              43




delicious, but sometimes I can trick my mouth into thinking it is
beef and fresh vegetables.
    At times, we eat rotten food. Eat rotten food or starve--that is
the choice. Rotten cabbages, rotten potatoes, maize with bugs and
worms squirming in an old, rotting bag.
    I put my finger to my lips. They are cracked and my mouth is
parched and bleeds. The pains of hunger are deep. My insides burn.
They growl and demand what I cannot give.
    Yesterday I was playing soccer with friends by the lake. I had
not eaten for a week, but when there is no food, you keep busy and
hope to forget about it. I tried eating some grass, but it made my
stomach sour.
    Suddenly, an unexpected thorn shoved through my foot and a
terrible pain shot through me. It started in my belly and traveled to
every place in my body. Falling to the ground, I cried out with all of
my might. I grabbed my head and clawed the dirt and begged God
to make it go away. But He didn't listen, and the pain did not leave.


"Queen Adanna! You are being summoned to your bath by your
servants!" Tobile shouts.
    I dream of hot water filled with lavender and rose petals, precious
oils, and perfumes fit for a queen! I roll in pine needles, a substitute
for a queenly bath.
    "Thank you, Princess Tobile! What is that I hear? A knock on the
palace door? Tobile, you are being summoned by the most handsome
and mighty warrior in the kingdom for a special royal dinner! He
waits for you in the banquet hall where there is lamb, potatoes, and
a special dessert prepared just for you."
4 4 T o m Da v i s




     Sometimes, if I try hard enough, I can almost make myself
believe these dreams.
     I pluck a blade of dried grass from the ground, longing for the
day I might have a better life. Today I cannot see it.
     "Adanna, do you remember when things were different? When
everyone was not hungry and dying?"
     "Why are you talking like that? Happiness does not live in those
words."
     "But we have no crowns on our heads or paint on our fingernails."
She cannot see it today, either. I feel Tobile's little body shake next to
me. I know she is crying.
     I put my arms around my friend.
     "Things will change, Tobile. Maybe like Pastor Walter says, God
will help us." I tap my fingers in the dirt. I do not believe what I say.
"He will not forget about us. But I do not know how long we will
have to wait."
     "Maybe He is lost."
     For some reason, this makes us laugh.
     "Maybe He has people to take care of who are in worse situations
than us."
     Our silence says neither of us believes this.
     Pastor Walter talked about this last Sunday in church. The
title of his message scared me. He started out, "We are all dying
like flies."
     I'm old enough to know what death is. Pastor Walter said
everyone was dying because of AIDS. Because they weren't faithful
to their one wife.
     He said that God would help us when we starting obeying His
Scared                                                           45




Word. He held up a book. A Bible. He said when we seek God with
all our heart we will find Him.
    Maybe everything got bad because people stopped obeying
God.
    I remember when my friend Blossum and I were playing in the
fields. She snuck up on me and yelled, "Tag, you're it!" I chased her
through the fields and into the village. She went flying though the
door of her home, and I followed. We stopped when we saw her
father. He lay curled up in a heap, coughing. He moaned like an
animal in great pain. Shriveled up to nothing, he looked up at us
with terror in his eyes. We ran. He was the first I saw, the first of
the sick.
    Two days later he died.


Tobile and I lay our heads down on the riverbank. As I listen to the
trickle of water, I ask God to put things back to the way they were.
Maybe all we have to do is ask.
                          Chapter Six

Stepping off a plane in the Johannesburg, South Africa, airport in
December is like walking into a packed men's locker room. My first
whiff of Africa is in the walkway from the plane to the terminal, and
it's like discovering food that's been left in your refrigerator for a
month. The drinks and the sleeping pill I took to get me through the
eighteen-hour flight are not helping.
    There are two lines--one for South Africans and the other for
foreign visitors. The line for visitors snakes around a series of PVC pipes,
where everyone waits patiently. No one is talking except a big-haired
lady with glasses who is wearing a full-length denim dress. She's going
on and on about how she's going to "evangelize the heathen" and bring
them all the saving knowledge of Jesus so they won't have to burn in
hell for eternity. She won't shut up about how miserable her flight was
and how rude the stewardesses were. Then she begins handing out Bible
tracts. I grab one. It's titled, "The Execution and Hell to Pay."
    The official in the customs line gives me a quick smile before
looking at my passport.
    "Press?" She looks at me inquisitively.
    "Yes, photojournalist."
    She sighs heavily and shakes her head and stamps the papers
twice.

                                    46
Scared                                                              47




    "Do some good for our people, would you? God knows we
need it."
    "I'll do my best."
    I've never actually had a customs agent speak to me before.
    Two bright orange bags tumble around the corner onto the
carousel looking like oversized construction pylons. No sane person
would mistake them for their bland black or beige bags or try to steal
them. And in this city, theft is as common as a cold.
    Only one more line to get through: customs. The agent sits behind
an old wood-laminated podium waving everyone through as he reads
a magazine. They could care less what people are bringing into their
country. What could anyone do that would be worse than AIDS?
    The glass doors open into a large foyer where hundreds of people
stand waiting for loved ones and business associates. Squinting into the
crowd, I see a rickety cardboard sign with my name scribbled in black
ink framed by two dark hands. Classy. I walk up, feeling like someone
hit me in the head with a hangover stick. All I want is my hotel.
    "Hey, I'm Stuart."
    The driver immediately grabs my bags, providing some relief to
my weary body.
    "Good afternoon, Mr. Daniels. I trust you had a good flight?"
    He speaks with a scratchy, high-pitched voice in a clear South
African accent.
    "I'll be your guide while you are here in Africa, and I must say
I'm extremely honored. I'm familiar with your work and--"
    "Thank you, thank you," I say and make a clear advance to the
car. "I'm ready to get to the hotel."
    "Yes, sir, Mr. Daniels. By the way, Charles is the name. I'll be
4 8 T o m Da v i s




happy to run you to your hotel and get you whatever else you might
need. I'm at your service."
    "Just get me to the hotel if you would, please."
    "Right away, sir."
    I look out the window to see a city in chaos. Graffiti is scribbled
across every wall and buildings display a colorful array of American
expletives. People walk swiftly along the streets, as if they are afraid. I
notice several women holding their purses tightly to their chests and
looking over their shoulders. The sun is setting, and fear is sweeping
across the city with the darkness.
    Disturbing images from the struggle of apartheid won't leave my
mind. Many people lost their souls in that evil sent straight from the
pit of hell. There's still a residual of the ugliness here, lurking in the
cracks and crevasses.
    I'm keenly aware of the dangers in Africa whenever I step foot on
the soil. Beyond the crime, there's something more. It's like evil spirits
take possession of you when your feet touch the soil. They are the living
echoes of devils that for generations spread war, hate, rape, and violence
throughout Arica. I have too many bad memories associated with this
place, beginning with what happened in Sierra Leone ten years ago.
    I hope the hotel check-in is quick. I need sleep, right after a
nightcap.


                              12345-54321
Charles stands at attention in the lobby at 8:30 a.m. sharp as I step
off the elevator, dragging my luggage. He is wearing a black derby.
He looks like a jockey.
    Driving in the city of Johannesburg is like touring another
Scared                                                              49




planet. Every home is surrounded by a wall eight to ten feet high.
Shards of glass sharp as lions' teeth line the top of the walls. Metal
spikes stuck in mortar jut out into the street. Electric fences snake
around the top of the glass to electrocute intruders who don't bleed
to death first. And as if that isn't enough, vicious attack dogs lurk
behind the walls.
    Charles eyes me in the rearview mirror and tips his hat in a
stately manner.
    "As you see, Mr. Daniels, fear is a way of a life here."
    "I can see that. What does that mean to you, Charles?"
    "The rich are afraid the poor will steal everything they've worked
so hard to attain. The poor are afraid the rich will hoard every morsel
of food and starve them to death, like the Romans did to their
enemies."
    We pass a building that looks a little like the Roman Coliseum.
I wonder if he's practiced this speech before.
    "So the South African whites have studied the tactics of the
Romans?"
    "It's a great strategy if you think about it. Surround entire cities
and cut off the food supplies. Slowly but surely, everyone dies from
starvation."
    "Do you really think it's that insidious?"
    I see a flash of anger in the rearview mirror, but his voice stays
calm and measured.
    "I grew up in those shanties and barely escaped with my life.
It was the whites who almost killed me. They show no mercy, even
though they have so much wealth and so much to spare."
    "They choked you out? Just waited for you to die?"
5 0 T o m Da v i s




    "They treated me like a worthless dog. All I wanted was a chance to
go to school. But the whites closed all the schools in our neighborhood.
They did not want us educated. They wanted us to starve."
    "Sounds like a form of genocide. Death by economics instead of
guns and bombs. How convenient."
    Charles nods his head. "You have got that right, Mr. Daniels."
    I recall an idea tossed around by some that the South African
whites invented the AIDS virus to kill off the blacks. It had always
sounded like conspiracy fanaticism to me. But if the rich whites
would starve them out, why not infect them? It is a sick thought,
one I don't mention to Charles. God forbid, imagine if it were
true.
    "See for yourself. Those expensive houses on the hill--that is where
the rich live. Now, look down in the valley, right below the houses. See
that glittering silver? That is from the tin roofs in the shanty town,
a slum where the poor die every day from starvation. The rich look
down from their decks and watch them die. It is sport to them."
    "You don't really believe that, do you?"
    "They do it. Every day."
    "I've been all over the world, Charles. Economic cruelty isn't
unique to Southern Africa. I've seen it in the Dominican Republic,
South America, even America, for crying out loud."
    "What's your point?"
    "My point is, and no disrespect intended, you're not the only
ones suffering. And blaming the rich won't help anybody."
    "Have you ever been poor, Mr. Daniels? I don't mean the kind
of poor where you cannot pay your cell-phone bill or your cable-
television bill. I'm talking about the kind of poor where you wake up
Scared                                                                51




in the morning and wonder, for the tenth day straight, if you will go
hungry again."
    "No. I've not been poor. But what are you saying? That the rich
are responsible to feed the poor? It's their fault?"
    "Mr. Daniels, the rich do have responsibility. It comes with the
power of wealth."
    "People who want or want to keep power don't care who they're
trying to dominate."
    We drive out of the city and into the countryside. Rolling hills, rich
farmland, and lush vegetation surround us. It's hard to imagine so many
starving people in the midst of what looks like a place of plenty.
    "The whites secretly hope we will all die from poverty or AIDS so
they can remove the electric fences. I've heard some say this is God's
way of destroying sinners. It's a plague like the ones sent upon the
Egyptians." His high-pitched voice has reached an even higher plane.
    "If what you're saying has any merit of truth, a plague has already
visited the rich because they have lost their souls."
    "True, Mr. Daniels, and what does it profit a man to gain the
whole world and lose his soul? Still, when you live desperate like so
many do here in Africa, you might just trade your soul for a crust of
bread. I don't see how a merciful God could judge that sort of trade
as wrong."
    "How can you believe in God with what you just described?
With what you see around you?"
    "Oh, I believe. God is our only hope, Mr. Daniels. Don't you
believe?"
    "I used to, a long time ago." The truth is, I don't know what I
believe anymore.
5 2 T o m Da v i s




    As we continue the drive into the heart of the country, smoke
dragons fill the air. The remainder of last year's harvest returns to the
earth to await the next cycle of winter.
    "What about you, Mr. Daniels?" Charles raises his eyes to meet
mine in the rearview mirror.
    "What do you mean?"
    "Have you lost your soul?"
    "I don't even know what that means. I've seen things in your
country, all over `God's creation.'"
    "I know. I have seen your photographs."
    "And I have done things I am not proud of."
    "Then let me ask, if I may, are you here to take photographs of
our suffering people only to display them like they are animals?"
    I can feel the heat rising in my face, but I corral my anger.
    "Look, man, I'm here to do a job, my job--not to solve the
problems in your country. I didn't start them, and I'm not responsible
for them. I'm just here to do a job."
    "Forgive me, Mr. Daniels."
    "No, Charles, forgive me." I blurt this out in a knee-jerk reaction.
I don't know why.
    It will be a relief to see Gordon in Swaziland. He won't grill me
like I'm some kind of criminal. There's not a writer I'd rather work
with than Gordon. He is a bit of a living legend. Word has it he
drinks too much and used to have a reputation as a womanizer, but
that just makes him more interesting.
    Silence crowds into the space between Charles and me. There's
nothing left to say. So I close my eyes and go to sleep.
                        Chapter Seven

432 234
    Adanna

I say good-bye after a day with Tobile and start toward home. The
sun is a giant ball of orange fire hovering motionless in the sky. It
watches me.
    "God is light, and in Him is no darkness." Pastor Walter read
that from the book. The Bible. He said we should all try to walk in
the light. I think about how I can walk in this light, but as the sun
sinks, I feel as if God has gone too.
    I am the only person on the earth.
    "God, are You there?" I cry aloud. "I'm hungry, do You hear
me?"
    Silence.
    "Pastor Walter says You are good and You are light, but if You
are, why do You watch us wither away and die?"
    My words pierce the night, then die suddenly away in the wind.
I take a deep breath.
    "Pastor Walter, he's good. But You ..." I look up at the new night
sky, "I'm not so sure."
    I feel a chill and stop to listen. My heart races, and the pain returns
to my stomach. I sit behind a small tree. I wait. I wonder if someone is
following me. After a few minutes, feeling foolish, I move on.

                                   53
5 4 T o m Da v i s




    The path home comforts me.
    I bounce onto the porch and burst into the front door to find my
momma. Something is not right. She stands in the corner holding
onto a pole that supports the thatched roof. Why is she grabbing her
side and wincing? There's a bucket below her. I notice large sores on
her left arm, one blistery red and oozing blood. I've startled her and
she gives me a look of surprise and sadness.
    "Adanna, don't ever come running through that door again, do
you hear me! How many times have I told you that?"
    Why the grunting and panting in her voice?
    "Momma, I'm sorry. I was just excited to see you. Where are
Precious and Abu?"
    She falls onto the bed and grimaces as she attempts to swing
her legs onto the mattress. Her legs look like dead wood. The bed is
disheveled and unmade.
    "Mother, are you okay? What's wrong?"
    "I'm just a little tired. Your brother and sister are with Auntie D,
but they should be here soon. There's no need to worry."
    My mother had hardly been sick a day in her life. She's stronger
than a Cape buffalo. My mind flashes to what I heard the elders say
at the kraal.
    "Adanna, come sit down next to me."
    I slowly shuffle my feet across the dirt floor and sit down on the
bed. It creaks loudly as if it may break.
    "I want you to know how much I love you and what a special
girl you are. When I was carrying you in my belly, I realized there was
something special about your life. God's hand was on you."
    "Thank you, Momma, but why are you talking like this?"
Scared                                                            55




    "I want you to know the truth about who you are. I never want
there to come a time when you think that things are hopeless. I do
not want you to believe the lie that you will not accomplish great
things in your life. I want you to believe in yourself no matter what
happens."
    "Oh, Momma, I do believe in myself. I am going to get a job one
day and buy food so we are never hungry again."
    "Yes, child, I know you will." She takes my hand and squeezes it.
    "I am not talking about surviving. I am talking about doing
something special with your life, about going to faraway places and
fulfilling your destiny. God has shown me a vision of your life, and
you are not meant to waste away in this dust bowl. You must take
care of Precious and Abu. Find a way out for all of you. Do you
understand what I'm saying?"
    "I think so."
    "No matter how bad things seem, no matter how bad they get."
She hunches over and begins to cough violently.
    "Momma, are you all right? Momma, can I get you something?"
    "Maybe you could make dinner for us."
    I kiss her. Her forehead is cold, more like winter than summer.
With a pale, salty taste in my mouth, I walk outside to get wood for
the fire.


Momma hasn't had good food in weeks. The store is just three
kilometers away. I will go there to get Momma something good to
eat. Daddy and I would go there on special occasions to get oxtail for
a celebration meal. Next to the store there is a place that scares me.
Strange men drink corn liquor and say mean things. They remind
5 6 T o m Da v i s




me of snarling animals. I try not to think about that as I make my
way there.
    I pass the bad place, keeping my head low. In the store several
loaves of bread behind clear glass pull the saliva from my mouth. My
stomach growls, like a native beating on a drum. I could steal that
bread and not even feel bad.
    A fat, angry-looking lady stares down at me. She obviously eats
well. The counter smells of curdled milk. Suddenly, I feel dirty and
ashamed. I imagine I am a princess.
    "Hello, ma'am. I'm wondering if I might borrow a loaf of
bread."
    "Borrow? Ain't nobody borrowing nothing from this store,
little girl. Where's your money? That's the only thing gonna get you
bread."
    "I have no money. But I promise I will bring you some as soon
as I do. My momma is starting to get sick, and I think it is because
she has not had anything to eat."
    A tall stranger dressed in black walks through the door. Outside
sits a shiny silver car with a symbol on the hood that looks like a star.
He turns toward me and gives me a look of disgust. I wonder why
he hates me.
    "We all haven't had much to eat around here. But what we do
eat, we pay for. If you haven't got the money, there's nothing I can
do for you."
    "What can I do for the bread? Can I work for you? I am a good
helper! I can clean your store."
    "Not a chance, girl. But you can go ask someone next door to
buy you some bread. Maybe they'll have mercy on you."
Scared                                                               57




    "Here's some mercy for you," laughs the rich man. He flips a
coin at me.
    "Thank you, sir." But it is not even enough to buy a tiny piece of
gum. He turns his back on me like I don't exist.
    The nasty woman behind the counter seems to find this amusing.
    I have no choice but to ask the men next door. Maybe I can
collect enough coins to buy a loaf of bread. I will look for a friendly
face.
    The small hall is thick with smoke and the rotting smell of corn
liquor. I look for friendly eyes and see none.
    Most of the men are old. Some are the age of my daddy. They
look at me like vultures about to devour a dead animal. Every single
one has a cigarette hanging out of his mouth and a drink in his
hand. A few younger men are scattered in the room playing pool on
a worn-out pool table.
    I pass them, like a helpless goat. They laugh and point at me.
    What is there to see? I am a starving twelve-year-old girl with a
bloated stomach. My clothes are rags. They used to be the right size,
now they hang loosely on my skinny body.
    An older man with missing teeth glares at me. I see a forked
tongue come from the center of his mouth. I am scared, and I turn to
run. He grabs me hard and pulls me toward him by my arm.
    "What is it you want, little girl? Are you looking for some time
with a real man?"
    I have to leave, but his grip is too tight, a ring of fire around my
bony arm. The other men laugh.
    I kick at his shins, but I cannot break free. I feel the sting of his
open hand smack my cheek, and I fall to the floor. He spits in my face
5 8 T o m Da v i s




as I lay on the floor. The other animals follow his example and spit on
me too. The spittle mixes with the blood coming from my nose.
    He reaches down to grab me again, and my fingernails land deep
in the flesh of his arms, ripping his skin, drawing blood. His grip
grows tighter, and he throws his head back with enjoyment.
    "That all you got?"
    A scream springs from my soul. I am crying out to be rescued, but
there is no prince for this princess. His arm smashes against my face
sending me into a fit of dizziness. He silences me, covering my mouth
with his sour, poisonous hand. Gasping for air, I choke and gag.
    I bite down hard on his hand. His blood sprays in my mouth.
It tastes rotten. He winces in pain, but it only further enrages this
demon. He drags me like a lifeless corpse into a back room that
smells of mold and urine. The laughter fades, and the door slams as
he pins me against the wall.
    "What do you want, little girl? Huh? Did you come here looking
for a good time? I can give you a good time."
    The smell of corn liquor pours out of his mouth. Gagging and
choking, my mouth opens to hurl the contents of my stomach but
nothing comes. He touches my lips with his forked tongue.
    "I just want a loaf of bread for my sick momma!" I choke out.
    "Is that all this will cost me? A loaf of bread? Do a good job, and
I might give you two."
    He throws me to the ground and lies on top of me, reaching for
my clothes.
    "This will only hurt for a little while."
    I reach down deep inside myself and wail a kind of prayer.
    "Oh, God, save me. Please save me."
Scared                                                             59




    My eyes blur. Faint shadows flicker across the ceiling. Other
men have filed in to watch the show. I know I am going to die.
Another scream, but my words have given up too. The world has
become silent. It has transformed into still pictures. My body no
longer hurts.


"Adanna. I am here with you."
    I approach the golden chair.
    "Am I home?"
    "No, the time has not yet come."
    "Please, do not make me go back."
    "Remember, Adanna, who you are. Remember the meaning of
your name and the gift I gave to you."
    "Please make them leave me alone."
    "Have faith, Adanna."
    "What good is a gift if I can't understand it? What does the scroll
say?"
    "All I ask is for you to trust me."
    "I do not know how to trust!"


I am rising over my body. Looking down, I see myself under a man
who is more pig than a human. He has my skirt in his hand, tears
it to pieces and throws it to the side. Two more men come into the
room and catch my ripped clothing as if it were some sort of prize.
They hold it and smell it.
    Time leaps ahead or freezes. I see myself lying on the ground,
not moving.
    Quick as a cheetah, a figure darts into the room and crashes into
6 0 T o m Da v i s




the animal on me. The pig flies through the air as if hit by a speeding
truck and crashes against the wall with a crunch. In an instant I am
free. I cannot open my eyes and blood streams from my nose and
mouth, but I am alive.
    Glass breaks and furniture smashes into a million pieces as the
other two men run from the warrior. Everything around me dissolves
and disappears.
                       Chapter Eight

After what seems like only minutes, I wake to discover that Charles
has covered many miles. He tells me we're just outside the Swaziland
capital, Mbabane. This looks nothing like the DRC. There are
mountains and rolling hills every place the eye can see, short green
grass and towering trees litter the landscape. This looks more like
Ireland than the Sahara.
    I hit the button, and the descending window cries out with a
squeal.
    Breathing deep, I'm amazed at the presence of budding flowers
and clean air. It reminds me of the time I spent at a monastery in
Southern California. The windows were open every evening and a
continual waft of jasmine permeated the air. That may have been the
only place I've felt peace.
    "We're making a quick stop at the border, Mr. Daniels. In just
a few minutes we'll be in the kingdom of Swaziland. Grab your
passport and follow me."
    "Right."
    "Shouldn't take long."
    My legs could use a good stretch.
    The South African side of the border is a breeze to get through.
They seemed happy to be rid of us. We walk a short distance to the

                                61
6 2 T o m Da v i s




Swaziland side into a building. Two giant portraits hang on the
wall.
    "The dynamic duo you see there will be in almost every building
you enter from this point forward," Charles blurts out. "Queen
Mother and King Mswati."
    "I guess along with royalty comes instant fame."
    "You could call it that. It's more like forced worship. The queen
mother runs the country; everyone knows it. Her son, the king, is
merely a finger puppet."
    "I'm sure he does all right for himself."
    "You might say that. He has thirteen wives and all the money he
could ever want."
    "Everything he wants and no responsibilities. What a life."
    The line is a slow-moving one since there's only one person
checking passports. He sits behind the desk, smoking a cigarette,
and his frown reveals how much he hates his job.
    "He does have one responsibility," Charles says.
    "Oh, what's that?"
    "To drive across the country every year and find another wife."
    "Yeah. Tough job."
    "Every December, all the good-looking women he's found across
the country gather to dance topless before him. The one that does
the best job becomes his wife."
    "You're kidding, right?"
    "I am not kidding. Ancient, pagan Swazi culture is still alive
today in the twenty-first century."
    "Being the king would be a young American fraternity boy's
dream."
Scared                                                               63




    We finally make it to the front of the line and our passports
are run through the computer and stamped. The agent never even
looked at us.
    The road into the capital is windy and gives me a touch of
motion sickness. I reach into my bag and pop a Dramamine. One
switchback after another leads us closer to town. The city is beautiful,
fit for a king. It sits high on the mountain range, a fortress protected
from its enemies by sheer elevation.
    We quickly drive into the center of town, where large buildings
loom and people cross the street in droves. Although it's filled with
foreigners, it looks like other larger metropolitan areas. This should
be an easy-enough story.
    But as we exit the city and head toward the hotel, a dramatic
shift occurs. Men and women in business suits are replaced by
children. Dozens of them line the road in tattered clothing. A
boy and girl no older than eight rummage through a garbage can.
Their ribs poke out through the rags they've draped over their
bodies.
    I notice children carrying babies on their backs. They, too, look
homeless and destitute. One young girl, baby strapped at her side,
rushes to our car and cleans the windshield with an old shirt.
    "They're wanting money. They are willing to do whatever it takes
to eat. Clean the windshield, sell their body, it doesn't matter."
    "How low can a human being stoop?"
    "As low as it takes to survive, Mr. Daniels."
    Two children, maybe three and four years old with no shoes and
filthy from head to toe, stand in the street with their hands out.
    "This is horrendous," I say, more to myself than to Charles.
6 4 T o m Da v i s




    "That's one way to describe it."
    "I can't believe this is actually real."
    "What do you think is happening over here? While you
Americans complain that your steak isn't cooked properly, these
children are starving in the streets!" Charles clearly no longer has any
sense of reserve with me.
    "They're everywhere--like ants." Then it hits me: There are so
many children.
    "Charles, where are their parents? Why so many children?"
    "Mr. Daniels, the people here are lucky if they live past thirty."
    We pass the hospital, a run-down three-story white building that
looks like an abandoned bomb shelter from the Cold War. People lie
on the ground like litter. It looks more like a soup line than a hospital
waiting room.
    A few elderly women stand by the street attempting to sell their
handmade goods to those who pass their makeshift kiosks. Sitting
at a stoplight, I look directly into an older woman's eyes. Her face
is weathered, like old leather. She has the look of a horse that's been
overworked to the point of utter physical exhaustion. And yet dignity
and determination pour from her large, clear eyes.


The gate rattles open, welcoming us as Charles pulls up to a truly
elegant hotel. It reminds me of simple '60s-style architecture in the
United States--beautiful but dated.
    "A little slice of America here in Swaziland, Mr. Daniels. This
area is known as the Valley of Heaven."
    It's nicer than I anticipated. I thought there was a good chance
I'd be sleeping in the bush fighting off spitting cobras in the morning
Scared                                                             65




and drinking monkey blood with the natives in the evening. Thank
God for small mercies. Maybe they'll even have beer on tap.
    My mind flashes to my true feelings about this assignment. I don't
think I can stomach taking pictures of half-dead people clutching
onto their last few moments of life.
    I think about what Big Bill, my boss, my friend, said before I
left, and I can't help but flinch. He took me out for a liquid lunch
and then dropped the bomb.
    "Stuart, we'd like to keep you on here at the Times. Hell, everyone
knows you took one of the most famous pictures of all time. You've
got a great eye and nerves of steel. But your account is running low. I
can't cover for you anymore. You gotta get it together, bring in some
money shots, or you're done."
    I just nodded my head. Then I started dumping all my marital
woes on him. Even in my martini stupor, I could tell Bill didn't care.
It's all business to him.
    Life couldn't get much lower. Now here I am, thousands of miles
from home. And yet ... I don't know what home is anymore.
    "Stuart," a loud voice echoes across the lobby. It's my Swazi
partner, Gordon. He gives me an enthusiastic handshake.
    "Welcome to Swaziland, the land of AIDS and the highest rate
of HIV infection in the world!"
    "Hey, Gordon. Great to see you again." This guy is a vet. He
started with the Manchester Guardian, then moved to the Times, and
he traveled all over the world doing freelance gigs. He finally settled
in Africa, so now he's the official South African correspondent.
    The glasses he wears make him look older than he is, and his
hair is completely white and a bit thinner than the last time I saw
6 6 T o m Da v i s




him. He's probably thinking the same thing about me, though it's
still hard to tell with my midlife-crisis Jim Morrison hairdo. Gordon
looks a bit like Einstein after a nap.
    I've always liked him, even though he's an odd bird.
    "The land of AIDS, huh? You say it like it's a medal of honor or
something."
    "No sense in hiding the truth, Stuart. The worst enemy is the
one that's unexposed."
    "True, but it's still a demented greeting."
    "Oh, lots of things seemed that way when I moved here. After
a time, the demented things just become a part of life. Death,
starvation, disease, rape, incest--you'll get used to it."
    I can't quite tell if he means it.
    Something squawks a desperate plea for help behind me. I spin
and see two monkeys running through the trees in hot pursuit of a
third. My heart almost beats out of my chest.
    Gordon erupts in laughter.
    "Stuart, you look like you've seen a ghost!"
    "That scared the crap out of me."
    "Welcome to Africa. By the way, you don't look so hot. Why
don't you get settled in your room, and I'll meet you in the lobby in
an hour."
    "I'm all right, just tired, man."
    He gives me a pat on the shoulder.
    "Make sure you have a BM."
    "A what?"
    "Do I need to spell it out for you, Stu? Take a good crap before
we head out to the bush."
Scared                                                            67




    I laugh. "Yeah, I'll do that."
    He turns and walks toward the bar. My kind of guy.
    "I'll buy you a beer if you hurry up."
    My mouth waters at the thought, and I quicken my pace.
    The lobby echoes as I cross a white marble floor toward my room.
A stone path lights my way, and there's a square green courtyard
bordered by a few dozen rooms. I am mesmerized by the view. I see
now why they call this the Valley of Heaven. Rolling hills and lush
emerald green mountainsides give way to miles of fertile fields below.
It's breathtaking. Who would have thought a place so filled with
death could also be so beautiful?
    I take a long, deep breath and exhale a few remaining carcinogens
from New York. Clean air feels like a new car smells. I've almost
forgotten what that's like.
    The Mountain Inn is very un-African, at least the Africa I've
experienced. The influence of the English colony is still strong in
many places around world. Swaziland is one of them. It's also a great
way to keep the affluent happy and the undesirables away.
    The room is a bit cramped and musty, but comfortable. The
inside looks like a typical Motel 6. Two small beds, a lamp on a small
desk, a coffeemaker with a few packets of Nescafé. I haven't seen that
in years. The sounds of home reverberate via a television speaker
broadcasting CNN International. Bad news is never too far away
no matter how far an airplane takes you. Today it's another school
shooting outside Beverly Hills.
    Suddenly my BlackBerry jingles telling me I have a new e-mail.
I glance at my phone.
    Bill.
6 8 T o m Da v i s




    All I have to do is think about this guy and he appears. Can't get
away from him. I sit on the bed and take a breath before reading my
impending doom.

      Stuart,
           Just a reminder from our last conversation: I
      need pictures that capture AIDS and the scope of the
      devastation. Get in there with the people. I know you
      can pull off this job!
                                                               Bill


    Gotta love those backhanded compliments.
    I'm still not feeling like myself, so I slip into the familiar jet-lag
routine: Brush my teeth, slap ice-cold water on my face, and hope
for a miracle. Charles's words echo in my ears. "Are you here to take
photographs of our suffering people to display like animals?"
    "You're the animal," I hear the voice in my head. "You are the
animal."
    Maybe I am.
    My stomach suddenly tightens in a wave of fear, like a free fall
in a dream. I sit in the chair and take a few sips of water. My head
is throbbing, so I pop one of the anxiety pills Dr. Carlyle prescribed
along with an ibuprofen.
    When Whitney and I first got married, we were madly in love.
I had a career I loved, and money was flowing to me like a rushing
river. Life could not have been better. I could do no wrong.
    But then things started to change. I don't know when, exactly. It
was a slow change at first. I just started to lose my motivation--for
Scared                                                              69




photography, travel, marriage, and life. I couldn't get out of bed in
the morning and couldn't go to sleep at night. I hated the sun, didn't
want to be around people, and for reasons that continue to escape
logic, couldn't care less about Whitney.
    We were still sharing the same living space, but we'd been
separated for weeks. I don't quite know what got me to accept
this assignment--it certainly wasn't any resurgence of belief in
myself. I can't even claim it was a last-ditch effort to salvage what
was once a promising career. I just wanted to escape for a bit.
Get some actual miles between the life I didn't recognize and an
uncertain future.
    If I didn't hate Africa so much, I might just stay here.
    I pack my camera, lenses, and tripod into my smallest orange bag.
    Downstairs, I walk backward to the lobby, taking in as much of
the view as possible.
    Gordon's waiting, flipping through a newspaper, the Times of
Swaziland.
    "You're looking better, Stuart. The car is waiting to take us to
a place called Beckilanga. It's a care point where hundreds of kids,
mostly orphans, come for food."
    Guess the beer will have to wait.
    We climb into a Pajero, a four-wheel-drive vehicle accustomed
to taking a beating on the African terrain. Gordon and I sandwich in
the back. His breath smells like gin, and his blue eyes are as bloodshot
as mine.
    "So what's up in the great Swaziland news today?"
    "Terrible as usual. `Man rapes eight-year-old sister.'"
    "How barbaric."
7 0 T o m Da v i s




    "You have no idea. There's my house, right over there." Gordon
points to a modest home behind an iron gate surrounded by a nine-
foot wall of cinder block.
    "Now that's what I call a wall. I thought it was safer here than
in the big cities?"
    "It is, Stu, but people here are still desperate. They try to steal the
fruit from my trees, bananas, even leftover food in the garbage. I can't
put trash outside a second before the trash man arrives or it will be
scattered to the four winds by desperate, hungry foragers."
    "How do you sleep at night? Aren't you afraid for your life?"
    "Not really, but you can never really let down your guard. I
certainly don't want to be stupid. Plus, my Rhodesian ridgeback scares
the socks out of anyone who might be stupid enough to jump over."
    "Mean as a pit bull?"
    "These dogs were bred during apartheid to rip the testicles off
any black men they encountered. I think they still feel the pain of
the ancestors."
    "Why did you move here? I mean, there are definitely shades of
England, but it's not exactly as hospitable."
    "Let me show you something." He pulls a wallet from a back
pocket in his faded jeans and removes a picture. Looks like a family
photo: Gordon, a beautiful white woman, and a gorgeous young
black girl about the age of twelve with huge brown eyes. The girl is
wearing flare-leg jeans and dark leather boots and a bright striped
shirt with a heart in the middle. Her skin is a medium brown and her
smile could light up a city.
    "This was my wife, Jo, and our daughter." He tenderly points to
them both. "You might as well know."
Scared                                                              71




    "Know what?"
    "It's a long story."
    "I've got time."
    Gordon takes in a long breath.
    "After I did a story in Swaziland, we decided to move across the
border into South Africa. At that time, it was just my wife and me.
She fell in love with the place and the people. They were so warm
and welcoming."
    "Even as dangerous as it was?"
    "It wasn't like this fifteen years ago. It was a wonderful place
to live. AIDS was barely on the radar and most of the people were
healthy and the culture was as rich and engaging as it had been for
centuries."
    Glancing out the window, the landscape drastically changes. We
are no longer in the city. Rolling hills and stick-and-mud huts pepper
the countryside. An iconic ... and ironic pastoral scene that would
be perfectly at home in National Geographic.
    "Jo and I were high-school sweethearts. I loved her more than
life itself, I tell you. We wanted a family in a terrible way, but found
out we couldn't have children." He pauses, looks directly at me. "You
really don't want to hear all this."
    "Yes. I do. Please, keep going."
    He turns to stare out of the window.
    "After we moved to South Africa, we got involved in a small
community with a friend of ours, Lynn. She had such a heart for
kids. This area was poor, and I mean dirt poor. We started going
down there every week to help them. We taught school, we cooked,
7 2 T o m Da v i s




we even taught them how to fish and swim. Actually, it was more like
they taught us.
    "As weeks turned into months, this one girl named Aisha stole
our hearts. She had quite the bubbly personality and wonderful
spirit. If we would have had a child, we both knew she'd be just like
Aisha. Except, of course, she'd most likely be white."
    We both laugh.
    "Her dad had died a few years back. We never found out why.
Then, her mother got sick. Within a month, she was dead. We were
told it was TB. Now we wonder."
    "You think it might have been AIDS."
    "Yeah. Maybe. But we didn't know much about AIDS then.
Anyway, we were told Aisha had no relatives, because they had
migrated from Swaziland. She was left all alone. No protection, no
food, nothing."
    "I can't imagine a little girl having to live like that."
    "It was terrible. It kept us up every night. One day, we concocted
this crazy idea: What if we adopted Aisha? We went to Lynn, who
had connections with the social-welfare office and the next thing you
know, she was our daughter."
    "Just like that? Wow, that's incredible."
    Whitney and I never were in sync about children. There was a
time or two when I wanted to be a dad, but those coincided with the
rare times she didn't want to be a mom.
    "We had new life in our old bones. A little girl to call our own.
Her name meant "life," and she brought so much life to us. In
her smile, her funny sayings, even her temper tantrums. It was a
wonderful time."
Scared                                                             73




    Was. Past tense. I don't like where this story is heading. Gordon
takes another deep breath and his eyes begin to water.
    "I was on assignment for the Manchester Guardian doing a
story in Mozambique. There was a terrible famine that summer so I
traveled north to cover it. While I was gone ..."
    He stops midsentence. I put my hand on his shoulder. He wipes
a few tears from his eyes.
    "You don't have to continue, Gordon. It's okay."
    He doesn't seem to hear me.
    "While I was away, a man broke into our house. Jo and Aisha
weren't even supposed to be there. They were supposed to be on
safari with friends from England, but they had to cancel at the last
second because of a death in the family. This intruder ... this demon
in the guise of a man shot them both."
    "I'm so sorry."
    "After their deaths, I couldn't bear to live in that house anymore.
I thought about moving back to England but couldn't do it. Jo and
I always said we'd spend the rest of our lives in Africa and it just
felt right to honor that dream. Since Aisha was from Swaziland, I
decided to move here. I figured maybe I could still make a difference,
you know?"
    "You're a saint, Clandish."
    "In the end, there was no real decision to make. It's what we
would have done together. We both loved Africa, we cared about the
people, and I had nowhere else to go."
    "I don't think I could have done it. I don't think I could have
stayed. I'd be too angry, too bent on revenge."
    "It was all about the children, Stuart. I was never too much of
7 4 T o m Da v i s




a religious man, but through this experience, I sort of became one.
And there was this verse in the Bible that stood out to me. `Pure
and undefiled religion is taking care of widows and orphans in their
distress.' Well, you've seen the need. Someone had to help them. I
figured I could be that someone."
    "A saint, Gordon." Again he ignores my generous compliment. I
suppose that's the way of saints.


As we near the community care point outside of the city of Manzini,
I can't believe what I'm seeing. The wind blusters, angry at the
world, throwing dust in every direction. In the distance, hundreds
of children stand, lie on the ground, and rest beneath trees. It looks
like a UN refugee camp. There's nothing for the children to do, no
buildings, no fence to corral them, no tents, not a playground in
sight, just barren land. I see the colorful headbands of two older
women, sitting together in the dirt and knitting.
    "What brings the children here?"
    "They've come in hopes of getting a small meal," Gordon says.
"But as often happens, the government and other relief agencies
haven't delivered any food. When you're starving to death, even the
hope of food is enough to make you walk five miles."
    "How long has it been since they've eaten?"
    "I believe it's going on four days now."
    "Four days? That's insane. Why are they still here?"
    "They have nowhere else to go, and the day isn't yet over. They're
hoping food might still arrive. It's called hope against hope."
    "This isn't at all like the lines I've seen at the soup kitchens back
Scared                                                                 75




in the States." I barely get the words out as I'm raking a sandstorm
out of my mouth.
    "Soup would be a luxury here, my friend. The meal they eat is
nothing more than corn with a tiny bit of beans. It's a mush called
`pap' and it's about as good as it sounds. But it's cheap. We've calculated
it costs about seven cents per serving. One serving a day, five days a
week, if they're lucky, comes to about a dollar forty per month."
    Before I can calculate how many children I could feed simply
by cutting back to one cup of Starbucks a week, a loud honk startles
me and a brand-new Mercedes van speeds by on the rocky dirt road.
"Food Vision" is written on the side.
    "Food Vision. So where's the food?"
    "That's what I want to know."
    The distended stomachs of the children seem to pull the skin
away from their bones. There is no light in their eyes. The thought of
these kids playing soccer, going to ballet class, or eating a pot-roast
dinner seems sadly laughable.
    Instinct takes over, and I bring the camera up to my eye and
start snapping. I offer a silent selfish prayer to a God I'm not sure I
believe in. Help these shots bring in some money. I've got to get my life
back on track.
    We walk toward the trees where a hundred or more people are
gathered.
    "Stuart, I'd like to introduce you to Pastor Walter. He's the man
responsible for the fact that all of these children are still alive, even
though today things aren't working out quite so well."
    Walter is short, about five-five. He hobbles over to me with a
limp, and an enormous smile forms on his face revealing a row of
7 6 T o m Da v i s




straight white teeth. There is a big space where one of his front teeth
ought to be. I find myself staring at the space instead of the man's
bright eyes.
    "It's a pleasure to meet you, Mr. Daniels. I've been praying for
you since I heard you were coming." With his accent and clenched-
mouth speech, my name sounds like "Dinnels."
    "Praying for me?"
    "God has something special for you here."
    I sure hope so. I need that money shot.
    "Well," I mumble, "I don't know what that means exactly, but
it's nice to meet you anyway, Pastor. Thanks for what you're doing
here."
    It sounds stupid, but what else am I supposed to say? I wonder if
this is what it would have been like to meet Mother Teresa. He sure
doesn't look like what I'd expected, though I'm not quite sure what
I expected. He just looks like an unpretentious man. Someone with
no trappings.
    My hand reaches for his, and he shakes mine while holding
his forearm with his free hand. I seem to recall reading about this
somewhere. A sign of respect? As if I know what I'm doing, I grab
my forearm too.
    "Thank you, thank you, my brother. All the honor is God's.
Without Him, you see, we could do nothing for these wonderful
children. Or for ourselves. Times are hard in our country. But we
know God has not forgotten us, and He will see us through."
    Walter's accent is thick and hard to understand.
    Gordon says, "Walter, tell Stuart your story."
    "It is not my story. It is the story of these people." He spreads his
Scared                                                                    77




arms wide, as if reaching to the ends of the earth for a hug. There is a
long pause. It is as if this says all that needs to be said. Perhaps it does.
    "I think it's okay to elaborate a bit, Walter."
    Walter smiles and turns toward me.
    "When I started seeing the many, many people dying in our
community, it broke my heart. AIDS has made life in my country
very bitter. I used to stand in my church and tell the people about
God's goodness. But one day I looked around and saw so many
orphaned children filling my building, and every single one of them
was hungry. This didn't feel like God's goodness. These children had
no one to help them, no one to turn to but our church.
    "One day some children were lying in the corner of our church
during the service. After the service was over and everyone filtered
out, one child remained. I thought to myself, this little one is so very
tired. I went to wake him up, but he was not sleeping."
    A gorgeous little girl skips to Walter's side, throwing her arms
around his legs. She has on a filthy yellow dress, and her eyes sparkle
like sunshine. Her hair is cut short. I wonder if it's to prevent lice. He
puts his arm on her bony shoulder.
    I can see the pain on Walter's face.
    "It was a wake-up call for me. God's goodness didn't just happen
because I talked about it. I realized that I had to act. So I started to
pray, `God, send me people who have the ability and the finances
to help us.' And you know what God said to me? He said, `Walter,
what's in your pocket? Start giving to these children out of what
you have, and I will take care of the rest.' And that's exactly what
has happened. There were many nights when my own children went
hungry because other children in our community would die without
7 8 T o m Da v i s




something to eat. Maybe my kids were a bit skinnier because of that,
but we kept other children alive."
    "Stuart, Pastor Walter and I were talking yesterday, and he feels
it would be a good idea for you to see some of the people in his
community. See what their life is like and how they live. If you want
photographs of real people in real circumstances, this is the best way
to go about it."
    "Yes, my brother, I feel like it would be a good idea to visit my
friend Samson. He suffers with the HIV virus and will talk about it.
He lives just a short way up the hill."
    We climb into the car, and I change lenses on my camera as we
travel across the bumpy road. I could do this upside down on a roller
coaster. I'm a little nervous. I've never actually seen a HIV-infected
person up close.
    A few minutes later, we pull up to a run-down shack in the middle
of a small grove of short trees. Someone took a few sticks and a whole
lot of mud and slapped this thing together. The corrugated tin roof
on the mud hut is held down by about ten large rocks. The edges of
the roof are flapping and banging in the wind, and it looks like it
could fly off at any second. This is not a home fit for a human.
    My camera's eye blinks rapidly, capturing every angle.
    We step inside and are confronted by the acrid smell of rotten
potatoes. There's a very small living area and one other room, which
looks like the bedroom. The whole place is about twenty feet by
twenty feet. There's no electricity. Small shafts of sunlight pouring in
through holes in the roof provide the only illumination. There's no
sign of life.
    "Samson, my brother, are you here?" Walter says.
Scared                                                               79




    There's no reply.
    "Samson!" Still nothing.
    An eerie feeling lingers.
    Walter walks into the second room, and Gordon and I sit on
rickety old stools. As much as I know about how HIV works, I still
can't shake the feeling that the house is contaminated. I try not to
touch anything. Footsteps shuffle in the other room. We hear small
whispers. Gordon is scanning the room and writing in a beat-up
notebook that looks like something he's carried with him since the
fifth grade.
    "That's a good sign," Gordon says in a loud whisper.
    A few minutes later Walter emerges.
    "He's coming. He is very weak. Samson has not been doing so
well these past few weeks. I'm really worried for him. He refuses to
take ARVs and is totally dependent on God's healing power for his
recovery. How can I convince him otherwise?"
    Samson lumbers out of his bedroom to meet us. He balances
his weight on a weathered cane and takes slow, painstaking steps.
Gordon, who typically moves with the tact of a wild boar, walks over
to him, tenderly places his arm underneath Samson's, then around
the small of his back and practically carries him to the broken-down
sofa chair in the corner of the room.
    It seems to take him ten minutes just to sit down and gather
himself.
    I don't know what to say or do. I'm way out of my element.
    Finally, it's Samson who speaks. His eyes are vivid, alive with life.
But his body is broken, a shadow of what I imagine it used to be.
8 0 T o m Da v i s




He holds onto the cane to keep his body upright, but his hands are
shaking. He looks like he could snap in half at any second.
    "Hello, my brother. It is an honor to meet you. I have been
praying for you to come all the way from the United States."
    "It's good to meet you too." He's been praying for me?
    Gordon is scratching away with his pen.
    "Samson is as strong as a bull in his spirit and character," Walter
says. "He may not look like it from the outward appearance, but let
your spirit see what your eyes cannot. Some time ago, he was not a
good man. He was a truck driver, and he would sleep with women he
met at rest stops. That's how he contracted the HIV virus."
    "It's something I'm not proud of," Samson whispers.
    "But this man loves God. He has changed his life and believes
God will heal him. In this life, or the life to come." Pastor Walter
sounds like Martin Luther King.
    "I want the world to know I'm a human being," Samson says.
"Although I have a terrible disease, I still have feelings, I still have
fears, and I'm still a child of God. It's a very strange thing when
you're sick and your entire community, people who have known you
for years, treat you like a leper."
    I nod, and my eyes focus on a handful of strange-looking spots
spread out on his face. They look like boils.
    "I want you to take my picture. And under the picture, I want
you to write, `The body of Christ is suffering.'"
    Of all the shots I've taken, this may well be the strangest. This
dying, dirty, man, stinking of death, wants me to take his portrait.
    He stands up straight, bracing himself against the wall. There are
two photos hanging behind him.
Scared                                                           81




    "Samson, who are those two people?" I need to know for the
shot.
    "That's my mother and father. Both dead. Both from AIDS. My
father contracted the disease and came home and passed it to my
mother."
    He stands as still as he can and musters a slight smile. He wants
the world to know something.
    "And now," Samson says, "I want you to pray for me."
    "Oh, I'm just a photographer, from the Times. I really don't
know much about praying. I, I just, well, Walter will pray. He's the
pastor."
    Walter looks at me. "Go on, Stuart. Pray for this man. He's been
waiting for you for weeks. We will pray with you."
    I feel a tingle up my back, like the moment following a near-miss
collision with a bus. Pastor Walter grabs my hand and walks me over
to Samson. I am shaking. I haven't prayed out loud since Sunday
school.
    My hand rests lightly on Samson's frail shoulder, and I open my
mouth, begging God to fill it.
    Then it's over, I'm not even sure what I said. Samson has tears
running down his face. With a heart of gratitude he places his hand
on mine.
    "You have done a great service for me, and I thank you. May
God repay you for your good deed."
    Good deed? I am not good. But for some reason, I feel like I am
in the presence of a great man.
    Maybe God knows something about him I don't.
                       Chapter Nine

432 234
    Adanna

A hand of salvation rescues me from my prison.
    Gently he pulls me into the freedom of his arms. He places his
jacket over my shoulders to cover my nakedness. He's breathing hard
from his battle and has a bloody scratch over his eye.
    He is beautiful.
    "You have nothing to fear now, little one. I am here, and I will
protect you."
    I fall into his arms, and see that he is Tagoze. Then everything
goes dark again.


                             12345-54321
Tagoze is the brother of the village chief. One day after Daddy left, he
came to check on us and bring us corn, bananas, bread, and sweets.
Abu was in Momma's belly and had not yet come.
    Momma said, "Mmm, that Tagoze is a good man. God has His
hand on him. His reputation is clear, and his heart is gold. Adanna,
there are not many men like him here in our village."
    Here everyone is born poor. The only way out of this curse is
to be born into the chief 's family. Tagoze was one of those blessed
individuals. He is like royalty.

                                   82
Scared                                                            83




    But Tagoze refuses to live like a chief 's brother. Many people
believe that if it were in his power, no one would ever go hungry, and
no one would ever be sick. He does not think himself better than
anyone else, and he always gives to those in need.
    Tagoze wasn't always this way. He used to be a bad, selfish man.
Before the accident that took his family, he followed the path of
many men in our town, drinking all day and night, refusing to work,
and carrying on with women. Some said they often heard his wife
scream from the beatings he gave her. It is hard for me to believe
these stories, but Momma tells me they are true.
    One day, his world was turned upside down. As we heard it told,
Tagoze's youngest son, Kgosi, who was only six years old, started
a fire in their house. He was playing with the oil stove late in the
evening while his sisters and mother were sleeping. They had left it
on to provide heat because it was so cold outside.
    The house exploded in fire. Tagoze's wife came running out of
the house engulfed in flames. She died later that same night. The
children were already dead.
    On Sunday at church, Tagoze sobbed and sobbed, some say for
over four hours. Some days passed and people wondered how he
would live. But after much time with Pastor Walter, he had become
someone new. Someone who cared about all of us.


                              12345-54321
My eyes will not stay open. In moments, I catch a glimpse of light
through tiny slits. But everything is blurred and milky white. I
should sleep.
    I hear my sister and brother playing nearby. I know without
8 4 T o m Da v i s




seeing what they are playing with: a weathered, rusty soda can, a faint
"Coca-Cola" written on the front.
     I lift my hand to rub the sleep from my eyes, but it triggers a
ferocious pain, like a cat's claw down my face. I pat my cheek with
my open hand. Raw and swollen, it feels twice its normal size.
     Things are clearer now. I try to focus on the walls of my home. I hear
voices, two men's voices and my auntie, right outside the front door.
     "Why do you think the child went into that place?" It is Pastor
Walter.
     "Maybe she was looking for someone. Perhaps her father." I hear
the deep, clear voice of Tagoze. "I have the death of another man
on my soul now, but I cannot feel remorse for the creature who was
defiling that little girl."
     So the animal is dead. I lift my head so I can hear better. Precious
and Abu see me stir and move closer. My brother, Abu, is almost
three, and my sister, Precious, is four, almost five. Their presence
brings a smile to my battered face.
     "Hi, Abu. Precious, where is Momma?" My voice sounds as if
it belongs to someone else, scratchy and deep like the lady in our
village who smokes.
     Abu reaches up to touch my face, and a scream bursts from my
mouth.
     My auntie darts through the door. Pastor Walter and Tagoze
come in behind her.
     Her face looks pinched and puffy, like she has been crying.
     "Adanna, are you all right, my child?"
     "Auntie, Auntie. Oh, it hurts so bad. What are you doing here?"
     "Sweet baby, it is okay. Just lie still."
Scared                                                             85




    "Where is Momma?"
    "She is away."
    "But where is she? I need her. She should be home." I start to cry,
but no tears, no sound comes out. My stomach jumps in and out,
and the pain is fierce.
    "Your uncle Malako and I have taken her over to our home to
look after her for a bit. She is very tired, Adanna."
    The great bird of fear lurks close by. Something is speaking in my
ear, telling me things are not right.
    She turns her eyes away. When grown-ups do this, I know things
are wrong. She wrings her hands together in a strange way.
    "Is something the matter? Did she touch a moon rock? Auntie,
please tell me."
    Pastor Walter kneels down next to my bed.
    "My dear little sister, I am so sorry for what happened to you."
    Auntie turns to my brother and sister. "Precious, you and Abu
come outside with me and give your sister some peace and quiet!"
    I have a terrible feeling inside. It is worse than the pain from
what happened to me.
    "Adanna, your momma did not touch a moon rock, but she is
sick. We will help her and be with her, and pray to God for a miracle.
But first, I want to pray for you."
    Tagoze kneels beside me and closes his eyes as Pastor Walter prays.
    "God, may Your mercy and blessing and healing come upon
Adanna. Amen."
    I turn my head toward Tagoze. I can see the mean scratches across
his face. They are no longer bloody because they have been cleaned.
    "Thank you."
8 6 T o m Da v i s




     I am more tired than I have ever been. I fall back into a dark
sleep with no dreams.
     I wake to a great pain in my stomach. I try to stand, but I double
over, my outstretched hands narrowly stopping me from falling on
my face. My mouth starts to water, and I feel like I'm going to throw
up. But still there's nothing in my stomach, so it is another gagging
fit. I hate these fits.
     Auntie comes rushing over and helps me back onto the bed.
     "There, child. Let me get you some water." She puts little drops
on my lips. "You have slept for two whole days."
     I try to sit up. Auntie sits beside me, lending me her big shoulder
to lean against.
     Life and hunger must be brother and sister.


My earliest memories of my auntie are good. She was always kind and
tender. She would be considered wealthy in our community. The sign
of wealth in our country is a fat woman who has plenty to eat. That's
my auntie. One person said if she ever died, they'd have to bury her in
an empty piano case, whatever that means. She tells us she is as poor
as everyone else. That her body just works different, that's all.
     Auntie brought some food for us. We won't go hungry tonight.
But it is lonely without Momma here. It doesn't feel safe. Our door
has no lock. I eat a small amount of food and start to feel better. My
face feels more like normal, though I still cannot stand to touch it.
     "Adanna, I must go to my home now and take care of things."
     "Can we come with you, Auntie?"
     "No, we do not have room for all of you. You are a big girl. You
can watch out for your brother and sister."
Scared                                                                 87




    "Auntie, when will we eat? Are you going to bring food to us?"
    "I will try. When your uncle and I have something extra to share,
I'll make sure he brings it by. You'll still need to go to school even
though your mother is away. I want to make sure you and Precious
are out the door on time."
    "Did Momma not tell you?"
    "Tell me what?"
    "We have not been to school in over a month."
    "Why wouldn't you be in school?"
    "There is no money. Momma said she couldn't afford to send us
to school so we would have to wait."
    "Shame! Not sending your own children to school. I'll talk to
your principal and see what I can do."
    "Thank you, Auntie."
    "Now, I will help you all get ready for bed, and then I must go."
    After Abu and Precious are tucked away, Auntie kisses my head.
Then she picks up her bags and says, "Don't come to our home unless
we call for you. Understand?"
    "Yes, ma'am."
    "Good. Good night then, sweetheart."
    "Night."


                              12345-54321
Feels strange without Momma here; it is too quiet, empty, lonely.
    For two days, I have heard nothing from Auntie. No one has come
to our place, and I am still so weak. Abu cries most of the day because he
is hungry. I did pick some sour berries off of a tree that don't taste very
good. They cure the hunger pangs, but they give us terrible diarrhea.
8 8 T o m Da v i s




    Abu has to eat this morning; he can't wait another day. I made a
promise to myself that I wouldn't come back until I have food in my
hands. Kilometers from our home, I find berries that aren't so sour,
a gold mine! There are two bushes glowing with the round, green
fruits. Almost two handfuls end up in my shirt and I'm proud of my
find. It feels good to be a provider for my brother and sister.
    But the berries will not be enough. I walk to Pastor Walter's home.
    Even as I knock on Pastor Walter's door, shame overwhelms me.
I should not be here. But what other choice do I have?
    "Adanna, good morning. I'm glad to see you walking around
today. Please come in."
    "Thank you, Pastor." I stare at the floor. I am not sure what to say
and am angry at myself for coming.
    "Are you okay? What is the matter?"
    "I didn't know where else to go. I ... I was just trying to get some
food. I went to that place to see if anyone would give me money.
Momma needed food. I thought I would find kindness ..."
    "Is that what you need, dear?"
    "Well, Momma is with Auntie, but Precious and Abu don't have
enough to eat. I found some berries ... but I don't think it will be
enough."
    "Sweet Adanna, just come to Pastor Walter from now on when
you need something, do you understand?"
    "Yes."
    Pastor Walter goes to a small can in the corner of his kitchen and
opens the lid. He tries to hide what he sees, but I can tell the can is
nearly empty. He scoops what is left into his hands and offers it to
me. I can't take it.
Scared                                                            89




    "Here, girl, you take this right now and go feed your family."
    "But, I--"
    "I'll hear nothing else, now go."
    "Thank you, Pastor."
    Pastor Walter just gave me the last of his food. His own children
will go hungry tonight.


"Adanna? It's Uncle. Are you here?"
    Uncle Malako is not at all like my uncle Sipo. He scares me.
There's something about him that's just not right. He's got a strange
look in his eye.
    "I'm here."
    "Adanna, my sweet, it's so good to see you."
    He comes through the door, grabs my hand and rubs it over and
over. It makes me tremble.
    "Have you been missing your uncle Malako?"
    I'm silent, so he sits close to me. He rubs his hand on my leg and
pulls my skirt up to put his hand on my thigh. There's something wrong
with him. Has he been hanging around those ugly men by the store?
    "Just relax and let Uncle hold you and I will give you the biggest
piece of candy you've every seen. Oh yes, I have a surprise for you."
    I want to run away. I imagine kicking him or punching him and
wonder if I could actually do that.
    Someone makes noise outside.
    "Adanna!"
    Precious skips into the room.
    Malako jumps to his feet so fast, it's like he just saw a cobra
slither across the floor.
9 0 T o m Da v i s




    "Oh, hi, Uncle. Adanna, there are some foreigners in our village.
Can we go see them?"
    "Not just yet little one," my uncle says. "I came to take all of you
to see your mother. Where is Abu?"
    "He is with the white men in the village."
    "Go get him and then come to my home."
    "Okay, Uncle."
    I start to follow Precious. Uncle Malako calls after me.
    "Adanna, stay here. I want to talk to you."
    Pretending not to hear him, I run down the hill.


Abu is in the arms of a tall white man. Foreigners come to visit two
or three times a year. All of the children like it because they hand out
candy and gifts. Candy is a rare treat, and I take it like everyone else,
but it is not enough. It is not what we need. If they would just give
us money instead of candy, we could buy real food.
    "Abu, we have to go! Come quickly, we are off to see Mother."
    He jumps down with a thud. We all grab candy from the strangers.
    "Thank you," I say quietly.
    "Say thank you," I urge Abu and Precious.
    "Thank you," they yell out.
    The tall white man catches my gaze before I turn to walk away.
I cannot read the expression in his eyes. Most of these white men
have big smiles and say things like "God loves you." This one says
nothing.
    Our uncle and auntie live about a kilometer from our home.
The temporary happiness the candy provides is replaced by a sad,
worrisome thought of Momma. Fear also fills my stomach because
Scared                                                             91




of Uncle Malako. I am terrified of what would have happened if
Precious had not burst into the room.
    Their home is just ahead, but I stop short of it. It's not built
out of sticks and mud like our home, but out of expensive concrete
blocks. It's much bigger and has two rooms instead of one. I do not
want to go in because of what I might see. The thought of anything
happening to Momma is too much to bear.
    "Adanna, why are you standing there? Go inside. What is the
matter with you?" My uncle has come out of nowhere. He pushes
me through the door.
    Momma is lying in the corner of the room. Her eyes have a
funny yellow look, and she is as thin as a cow during a famine.
    "Oh, Momma, are you okay?"
    Using all the strength she can muster, she sits up in bed, then
raises her hand to stroke the back of my head. She is trying to look
strong. But I know what this means. My momma will die soon.
    Tears pour out of my eyes. I cannot stop them. There is nothing to
stop Momma from dying, and soon we will be all alone in this world.
Me, Precious, and Abu. Nobody will care for us or love us again.
    I wish there was something to do to make her pain go away. If
only I had a magic wand, I would wave it, and my mother would be
well. She would not have to die. If God really cared, He would wave
His magic wand and heal her. Maybe He's too busy to see Momma.
Or maybe He just doesn't care.
    This world is cruel, and it is mean. And I hate it.
                        Chapter Ten

The sun, a gigantic orange orb, sneaks behind the mountains to get
some rest. As it disappears, a remnant glow paints the sky in colors
both soft and brilliant. Perhaps this was indeed the garden of Eden,
as some claim.
    I'm enjoying an ice-cold Heineken and checking out a brunette
in a tiny red bikini while I upload the pictures I took today. The
brunette doesn't seem to notice me, and I'm glad for that. I don't
really want her to see me. I'm not even sure why I'm staring.
    I've never seen a slower Internet connection in my life. This thing
can't be uploading any faster than 14K. I've tried the company's FTP
server, normally much faster. Apparently, this is not true in Africa.
    Merely looking around the hotel, I could almost convince myself
I was still in the good old U.S. of A. However, the picture on my
laptop assures me I'm not. I'm looking at a dying man, dirty clothes
hanging from skin and brittle bones, alone in a shack I wouldn't use
for storing junk. But it is not the poverty that speaks to me in this
photo. It is the man's smile. It is not a smile of joy, but of dignity.
Dignity in the face of impending, certain death. I can't wrap my
mind around this crazy photo session. And the things he said? About
waiting for me to come from the United States? About God?
    I wonder how a man who is barely human can speak so well of a

                                 92
Scared                                                                  93




God who doesn't seem to care. No one should have to die like that.
Alone.
    This becomes my wish for this man. That he would not die
alone. I think of my wish and how much it is like a prayer. But I do
not lob it at God.
    As I wait for the pictures to upload, I take a quick peek at my e-mails.
Junk mail, spam, late-bill notices, and then one from Whitney.
    I suddenly hear Coldplay blaring from my BlackBerry.
    "Hello?"
    "Hey, Stu. It's Gordon. Are you ready?"
    "Yeah, just give me a few minutes to get my stuff together, and
I'll meet you downstairs."
    Gordon had lined up a dinner with someone from the Swazi
government. He wants to interview her for the story.
    "I've already ordered dinner for the three of us. They like to have
everything made ahead of time."
    "So, most of the Swazi people don't have any food, but those
who do eat like kings."
    "That's pretty much the deal, Stu. And it will be some of the best
food in all of Swaziland."


A half hour later, I head down, hair still wet, to join Gordon and
a beautiful woman who carries herself like a queen. Her head is
wrapped in a traditional silk headscarf woven with diamond patterns
of purple, green, and yellow. Her dress flows to her ankles.
    She stands as I approach the table.
    "Stuart, this is Sipwe."
    "Nice to meet you. I'm sorry I'm late." This is nothing new for me.
9 4 T o m Da v i s




    "No worries, dear boy, haven't you heard of African time? It's a
rare occurrence when anyone is prompt."
    "Yes I have been forewarned. But I think that rule applies to
Africans, not Americans. Please forgive me."
    Her green eyes seem to look right into my thoughts.
    Gordon had already ordered red wine, and I'm happy to have it.
Sipwe's jewelry is yellow turquoise, like nothing I've ever seen, with
streaks of black running in each piece. Whitney would love it.
    Our waiter rounds the corner, pushing a cart carrying several
large, covered silver trays. He's dressed in a busboy suit reminiscent
of the 1940s--a black and white ensemble complete with bow tie,
perfectly polished patent leather shoes, and a coat with tails. I'm
waiting for Charlie Chaplin to come skittering around the corner.
The waiters and waitresses are all African, and they call Gordon and
me "boss." I don't like it. I feel like I've time-warped back to the days
before the American Civil War. I am hyperaware of all this in the
presence of Sipwe. I'd swear this was a movie.
    The waiter meticulously sets each silver tray in front of me, his
service perfect. The lifted lids reveal a smorgasbord of delectable
cuisine. A Caesar salad with fresh Parmesan cheese and cracked
pepper, a ten-ounce filet mignon smothered in a pepper-mushroom
demi-glace, and sides of garlic mashed potatoes and fresh, grilled
asparagus with lemon on the side.
    A meal like this would be affordable in most places, but here in
Swaziland, it costs a fortune. Thank God for expense accounts.
    "Stuart, what is your view of people infected with HIV?" Sipwe
turns toward me. Gordon has a smirk on his face. I can tell he loves
this kind of exchange.
Scared                                                               95




    "I'm not sure what you mean."
    "I mean what do you think about them? How do you see them?
What do you say to yourself in secret that nobody else hears?"
    "That's a fair question. For most of my life, I have to say I've
viewed HIV as a voluntary disease, affecting homosexuals and drug
users. I avoided anything to do with it like the plague. No pun
intended."
    I cut a huge piece of the filet and watery-red juices squirt and
ooze in the center of the plate. It is cooked to perfection.
    "Quite a harsh response, don't you think?"
    I look over at my writer friend. "Gordon, aren't you supposed to
ask the questions?"
    "You should be a journalist, Sipwe," he says, but he doesn't come
to my rescue.
    "Yes, perhaps I should be. I think it is a fair question to ask the
man who has taken pictures of suffering people what he thinks about
this insidious, silent, and slow executioner."
    Sipwe is all business. We start to eat. I take my first bite, steam
pouring out--Gordon was right, this has to be the best food in
Swaziland, maybe some of the best food I've ever tasted. But as I
slowly chew the buttery-tender steak, I can't get the images of those
kids out of my head. I see them sitting in their huts tonight, their
bones poking out of frail skin, making them look like wooden
puppets. One of the side dishes on my plate would feed a half dozen
of them. I pick at the food, mulling my response for a moment. After
a mouthful of potatoes, I set my fork down and begin.
    "Over the years my view has changed. I'm not quite so naive as I once
was. And being here for a short few days has given me a new compassion
9 6 T o m Da v i s




for the victims of HIV/AIDS." I picture the two young children I saw
standing alone in the middle of the road on my first travel day. "It's so
hard to see the children who are left alone and who are infected."
    "Is it only the children you have compassion for?"
    "Well, certainly them above all others. The adults? Well, I still
find it hard to believe anyone practices polygamy when they know
it's killing them. How do women put up with it? Surely they have a
choice. It makes no sense."
    "Stuart," Gordon says, "that is what Sipwe is working toward in
Swaziland, in all of Africa. Women don't have a choice here."
    Sipwe squeezes my arm, her thick bracelets pressing against me.
    "There is no such thing as a woman's right. A woman doesn't
have the right to make her own decisions nor to tell her husband she
will not have sex with him. If she did, he would beat her, and she
would be shamed."
    I am left to ponder this and other difficult-to-understand truths
while I push food around my plate, then finally give up on what
should have been an amazing meal.
    During a pause in the conversation, I'm startled by the
reappearance of the waiter. He has brought dessert--a twenty-year-
old tawny port and a homemade slice of New York­style cheesecake
with strawberries and whipped cream. I glance down at Gordon's
plate. It is empty, and he seems primed for dessert.
    Perhaps you do get used to the poverty.
    Sipwe lifts her wine glass, stares into it for a moment, then
continues.
    "People here don't realize what they're dealing with," she says.
"Most people in our country are uneducated about how this virus is
Scared                                                               97




spread. And, when you have to decide between eating food--food
that your husband provides, mind you--or having him beat you
and leave you to die because you won't sleep with him, what would
you do?"
    She takes a sip of her wine and turns toward Gordon.
    "This is why we have to do a better job with education. It
takes time and years of mobilized effort to overcome generations of
ignorance."
    Now it's Gordon's turn to fire.
    "So what are your greatest needs? How would you ask the world
for help?" He reopens his notepad.
    "This is a complicated question. First, we need compassion. We
need people to care. If they care, they will go the extra distance to
join us in our struggle. Of course we need teachers to help us educate
and improve our schools. Some of our best teachers have died, and
the rest are dying. It's a very big problem. AIDS is a disease that kills
the strong."
    "But, Sipwe," I say, "how do you allay people's fear of AIDS? I
mean, how do you inspire people to come when the situation is so
dire, so ... and please excuse my bluntness ... so ugly."
    "Is that how you are experiencing it?"
    "It is hard to take. I'll admit that. I met a man today--a dying
man. There is nothing that can be done for a man like that. It makes
me feel helpless, and I don't like feeling helpless."
    "Gordon told me about your meeting with Samson." She takes
a sip of wine. "Shame, a man like that dying all alone. What's even
sadder is that there are millions more like him."
    "His pastor is trying to look out for him, but there are so many."
9 8 T o m Da v i s




    "So, Stuart," Sipwe's eyes lock into mine, "how do you see me?
What do you think of me so far?"
    I'm not quite sure how to respond. "You remind me of a friend
I have from the DRC. Her name is Wangari, and she is working for
her people as you are, trying to give people a voice and put an end
to the horrible violence there. I haven't known you long, but I have
a lot of respect for you."
    "Thank you, Stuart. I am honored to be compared to one of
your friends. Perhaps you will change your mind when you know
the truth about me."
    "What do you mean?"
    "I am infected with HIV."
    "No! But how?" I immediately wish I could take back my stupid
response.
    "I realize I'm not the stereotypical AIDS victim."
    Gordon tries to cover for me. "It never occurs to people, to
people like Stuart and me, that someone like you would have HIV."
Gordon obviously already knew about Sipwe, but I appreciate his
gesture.
    "HIV does not care who its next victim is. I'm a respectable
woman and have been a faithful wife to my husband all these years.
He, on the other hand, was not so faithful. A high-powered job with
the government went straight to his head. He was promising me one
thing and doing another. On one very dark, very sad night, he came
home to our bedroom and infected me with death. I had no idea
until months later."
    Gordon continues to scribble away in his notebook.
    "How did you find out?"
Scared                                                              99




    "A common cold that wouldn't go away. I'd never really been
sick much. But this cold turned into pneumonia, and I ended up at
the hospital. They knew what caused it, but didn't want to tell me. It's
that way with everyone who has HIV. After a few blood tests, it was
confirmed."
    "How did you deal with the news?"
    "It has changed my life forever, no doubt. But I decided I wasn't
going to waste away and die alone in some miserable corner." She
places her hand on my arm again, "No disrespect to your friend
Samson. Some of us have only one choice. I made up my mind the
day I found out, that I would be a survivor."
    "What spurs you to keep going?"
    "My dream. My dream is to educate every man, woman, and child
in our country about the devastating affect of AIDS. I want them to
know how it spreads and how they can survive if they contract it. I want
women to have the courage and support to say no to unfaithful husbands.
I want to do my part to see the end of HIV's destructive power in my
generation and watch as a new generation rises up to be free."
    "That's quite a dream. But is it realistic?"
    "Aren't we all believing in something, Stuart?" Gordon raises his
eyebrows at me.
    The red line swirls in the crystal glass. I bring it to my lips and
drink down the last drops.
    I haven't touched the cheesecake. The waiter appears suddenly
again and waits for me to acknowledge him before speaking.
    "Sir, is the dessert not to your liking?"
    "I'm sure it's fine. Everything was fine. I'm just not very hungry
tonight."
1 0 0 T o m Da v i s




     I pull out my chair. "Why don't you two finish your interview, and
I'll get my camera. I'd like to take your picture outside, on the deck."
     "Sure, Stu. I'll order us up some tea for outside."
     "Coffee for me. Remember, I'm American."
     I can't help but wonder what keeps these people going. Death
lives in their bodies, it rots them away, one cell at a time. And yet,
some--like Sipwe--still find reasons to hope while grasping onto
the ledge with their fingernails.
     The upper balcony will be perfect for the photo shoot. There is
good light, even at night. The moon is full, and its rays will give the
photo an ethereal quality--to match the ethereal nature of this rare
woman.
     The waiters have brought out coffee in what looks like the queen's
silver.
     "Sipwe, why don't you stand over here, near the doorway."
     Looking through my lens, she seems to be shrouded in other-
worldly light.
     I hear dogs barking in the distance. The guard dogs are keeping
the enemy away. I snap off photos, more than I'll need. My instinct
tells me any of these photos will work. Some people have that
look.
     Making a gentleman's advance, Gordon holds his hand in the
air for Sipwe. She obliges, arises gracefully and walks beside him, as
if they were old friends.
     "Stuart, let's walk. We can't pass up this night."
     Gordon's right. The moon blazes above the mountains like
a giant spotlight. For some reason it seems bigger here. We press
forward into the night.
Scared                                                            101




    The wind blows leaves in concentric circles and brings a chill.
Sipwe draws her wrap tightly around her shoulders.
    I strain to hear a sound that comes and goes with the turn of the
evening breeze.
    "Do you two hear that?"
    "What, the traffic? It never stops here," Gordon says.
    "No, no, it sounds like singing."
    As we walk, the two rangy white men and the African queen, the
voices become more distinct.
    The music is coming from a block or two up the road.
    "Do you think it's a festival?" I ask Sipwe. "A wedding maybe?
Certainly not a funeral."
    We turn toward a building alive with the music.
    Sipwe takes my arm.
    "It's a church service, Stuart. All over our country, people go to
the church on a Sunday night."
    "So many?"
    "The people here are deeply religious," Gordon says. "Many are
superstitious and worship their ancestors. They're called Zionists. It's
a mix between Christianity and ancestral worship. They run either to
Jesus or to the witch doctors. Pastor Walter is trying to fight against
this messy religion in the villages around his church."
    "Mr. Daniels," Sipwe says, stopping. "Our country is experiencing
so much brokenness, church is the only place people can put the
broken pieces back together."
    We enter a small sanctuary. It is stark, with simple chairs and no
curtains on the windows.
    The room is a sea of children and older women. Many are in bad
1 0 2 T o m Da v i s




shape, mere skeletons. It's the same look Samson has, bulging eyes
and jutting bones. Some are content to sit in the corner on an old
mat, many are standing. And every one of them is singing.
    The music, the voices ... I've never heard anything like it. They
sing at the tops of their lungs and dance like nobody's watching.
Spontaneous prayer is heartfelt and passionate.
    I feel as if I've entered another world.
    I think of a verse my grandmother taught me, one of the few
I still remember. "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven."
    I'm standing in the kingdom of heaven.
    The music comes to a crescendo, and everyone joins hands. The
sick, the lame, the healthy. My heart pounds hard and fast. I do not
want to hold hands with these people.
    A little girl approaches me. Her dress is a corrupted version of
a once-new pink princess dress, white frills at the bottom turned
brown. Looking deep into my eyes and smiling, she holds out her
hand. I cast an uncertain glance to Gordon. He nods. I lock hands
with this little girl and close the circle.
    The crowd moves to its knees in a hum of thanksgiving to their
God. I move with them. My lips begin to sing, though I don't know
the words or the tune. Peace and sorrow course together through my
being.
    Somehow, a velvet voice penetrates the din.
    "Stuart, feed my sheep."
    I know this voice. But it has been so long.
    Tears form in my eyes, and these tiny hands, locked in mine, will
not let me wipe them away.
Scared                                                        103




    As the service ends, we shake hands with so many people. Some
offer hugs, and I accept them. Only a moment ago we were strangers,
now we seem like friends.
    "Anything special happen to you tonight, Stuart?" Sipwe is as
observant as she is smart. My cheeks flush.
    "What do you mean?"
    "I know what it looks like when God speaks to a man. And that
look rested on your face tonight."
    A tingle races down my spine, but I have no words.
                      Chapter Eleven

432 234
    Adanna

The early-morning screeching of chickens makes me crazy when I
want to sleep. It is still dark, but not even squeezing my eyes together
and tapping my foot, something that usually helps me find sleep,
will stop the thoughts spinning in my mind. I do not want to get
up today.
    Auntie D talked to our principal, and she let me and Precious
come back to school. Abu stays a couple days a week with friends
who live farther away. They say this is better for Abu since I don't
know how to take care of a baby anyway.
    My teacher, Miss Ncondu, is no longer at the school. She was
stooped over like an old woman yet she was not old. When she read
stories, like my favorite, "How the Crocodile Got Its Skin," she used
different voices and made funny faces. She also read us beautiful
poems, and one made me cry. I remember this poem well, because I
memorized it.


                               A frica
       A thousand years of darkness in her face,
       She turns at last from out the century's blight
       Of labored moan and dull oppression's might,


                                 104
Scared                                                              105




       To slowly mount the rugged path and trace
       Her measured step unto her ancient place.
       And upward, ever upward towards the light
       She strains, seeing afar the day when right
       Shall rule the world and justice leaven the race.


       Now bare her swarthy arm and firm her sword,
       She stands where Universal Freedom bleeds,
       And slays in holy wrath to save the word
       Of nations and their puny, boasting creeds.
       Sear with the truth, O God, each doubting heart,
       Of mankind's need and Africa's gloried part.


    I made the mistake of asking the new teacher where Miss Ncondu
had gone. This skinny man came up to me--his eyes meet mine, he
is so short--and wagged his finger in my face.
    "Children don't ask after adults! You can stand in the back of the
room until school is finished."
    Yesterday, after a terrible rage, he forced us to stare at him without
looking away. Turning your head was punished by several lashes from
a jacaranda switch. He reads from a book and then talks, it seems,
to someone outside the window. He is not right. The other day, he
slowly pulled his shirtsleeve up past his forearm, then raked his long,
dirty, fingernails across the blackboard. A crazy smile crossed his face,
like on one of our spooky tribal masks. We all shook in our seats.
My hands wanted to cover my ears, but I fought them like they were
wild animals. The first to move or make a sound was dead meat. Our
class, which used to be fifteen, is now eight, and that is with the first,
1 0 6 T o m Da v i s




second, and third grades together. I feel sorry for the youngest ones
in the room like Precious. Good thing she is quiet by nature. Tobile
used to be in my class, but I have not seen her in weeks. I will not be
asking my teacher about her!
       I am in charge at home. Precious and Abu will be looking to
me when they wake up, their bellies swollen and hurting, their eyes
pleading for me to take care of them. Especially Abu, who is unable
to understand the cupboard is bare--how do I explain to him? He
cries for Momma, and it makes me feel like my head is going to pop
off.
       The old wool blanket filled with holes starts to stir on the floor.
At first just a little, then rolls of waves toss back and forth as if a
violent storm were forming in the room. Two huge, dark eyes emerge
and shoot open, welcoming the morning.
       The silence is broken, and the day erupts. Abu is up and running
around the room.
       "Hello, wild boy. Come see 'Danna." When he gets up, everyone
is awake. He yells and coughs.
       Momma would say, "Precious is our noontime princess." Even
as a tiny baby, she wanted to sleep longer than all of us. She loves
to lie around and be waited on. I have always enjoyed the quiet
and colors of the early morning, but that also has changed. Now
I dread the morning, because it means another day with no food,
no mother.
       I hear a rap on the door.
       "Hello, girl. Are you here?"
       The voice is scratchy and low. The door swings open and falls off
the rusted hinges. I rush over to pick it up. A very old woman stands
Scared                                                            107




outside wearing red paint in the corners of her eyes and across her
face. Multicolored beads droop from her head like bean plants, and
she is dressed in a red and black cloak draped over her shoulders and
tied across her chest. She is the witch doctor.
    "Yes, can I help you?"
    "Can you help me?" She throws back her head and laughs. "You
will be thanking me that I came to help you."
    "What do you mean?"
    "The spirits have told me about you. Your mother is sick. Is this
true?"
    "It's true."
    "Do you know why?"
    She tells me before I can answer.
    "She has made the ancestors very angry, Adanna."
    How does she know my name?
    "They are punishing her for her sin, and they demand
payment."
    "What kind of payment?"
    "Blood sacrifice. If we do nothing, that sin will fall to the oldest
in the family. That would be you."
    "But that is not fair! I have done nothing wrong!"
    "It is why I'm here, child. I know you have no animals to offer.
Therefore, your blood will have to do."
    "My blood?" My eyes go wide. I am afraid, then suddenly,
strangely hopeful. "Will my blood save Momma?"
    "When the ancestors are enraged, only blood can put them at
rest. It is what they demand."
    "What must I do?"
1 0 8 T o m Da v i s




    "Come to my house."
    "But what about my brother and sister?"
    "All of you, come to my house soon. The babies can wait outside.
You know where it is?"
    I nod. The hut is painted bright red, like the paint on her face. I
have never been inside. Why does she want Precious and Abu to be
left outside?
    "Do you have anything to eat? For them?" I ask.
    "Just come. I will be ready for you at noon." Then she turns into
the early-morning light and is gone, her cape trailing behind.
    Precious stares after her, now fully awake.
    "Who was that funny old lady?" she asks.
    I am suddenly dizzy, but I pick up Abu and take him to the hole
we use out back as an outhouse.
    My blood. To save my mother.
    I remember the words of the illuminated man. "Here is your
gift. It will make the way clear for you, and it will save many of your
people." Is this what he was talking about? Is my gift my very life?
    Precious is staring at me when I return with Abu.
    "Who was she?" she asks.
    "That lady was someone who wants to help Momma get better."
    "She smelled stinky."
    Precious is right. The witch doctor smelled like corn liquor and
burnt fungus.
    "C'mon, you two." I take them to the water pot. It is nearly dry,
but I wipe their eyes with the damp cloth. I do not bother with my
own face.
    What is my life really worth anyway? I am skinny and not very
Scared                                                           109




pretty. Precious and Abu would be better off with Momma. If she
could be well again, I would do anything.
    The decision is made.
    I pull back the door, now just leaning over the opening. The
sunshine scatters in our home, lighting the dark corners. Dust
speckles come alive and dance in the empty spaces. I want to take
one last look. Abu's first steps took place by the tiny kitchen area.
Right there, leaning on the wall on my bed, is where I read. I will
miss Abu and Precious and Momma. And Tobile.
    "Abu, Precious, come here, my sweets."
    Precious walks slowly to me on tiptoes, but Abu will not listen. I
take his hand and lead him outside. I wrestle the door back in front
of the opening, though it leaves enough space for a small monkey to
enter.
    The witch doctor's house is a ten-minute walk. It is a scary
house. There are stakes in the front yard, each with dozens of animal
bones hanging from strings. If there's a sickness, a death, a birth, a
celebration, and even if you need food or money, the witch doctor
had the answer. Supposedly she gets her special powers from the
spirit world. If she makes them happy, they will do what she asks.
Usually they're happy with a cow. I'm not sure what is true about
the witch doctor and what is made up, but I have no choice but to
believe. For Momma's sake.
    "Where are we going, Adanna? To get food for Momma? Will
the food make her well?" Precious does not understand. It is better
that way.
    "Soon, she will be well."
    We walk along a path I have walked nearly every day. It's lined
1 1 0 T o m Da v i s




with rocks and cacti and is not far from the beautiful baobab tree.
This tree not only makes me feel proud to be African, it is Africa--one
of our national symbols. I am holding Precious's hand, and Abu is
running ahead.
    I see the witch doctor's hut in the distance. The road forks off to
the right--where Auntie D and Uncle Malako live.
    "You two must go to Momma. I need to see the witch doctor
alone."
    Abu starts to dance down the road, but Precious pauses. She
looks up at me with puzzlement.
    My lips pucker and land on Precious's smooth, soft forehead.
This little sister of mine is more valuable than a thousand jewels.
    "Go now. Abu, you mind Precious. Sissy loves you more than
the sun, and the animals, and everything in the world."
    "Awight, Sissy."
    I watch them as they disappear down the dusty road.


A cracked, tarnished mirror hangs above the bells by the door. I study
my reflection. Bruised circles camp under my eyes. I look tired and
sad. My skin is like the ash left on the ground after a fire. My hair
is short and curly, with speckles of blonde and littered with dirt and
what looks like crumbles of leaves. I try to smile. My right lip purses
up but quickly falls back down.
    My insides are churning as if a troll lives in my belly. He's flipping
my insides with a cold steel shovel. Beads of sweat line my forehead.
    I rap on the door, hoping she won't hear me, my hands trembling.
There's movement inside.
    "Come in, child. I've been waiting."
Scared                                                               111




    The home reeks of musty wood and incense.
    The witch doctor sits in front of a cauldron, steam pouring over
the sides like spider legs made of smoke. Candles form circles on the
ground and parts of dead animals hang from the ceiling and walls.
    My teeth chatter like I've been stuck outside on a cold night. I
look up to see bones in a basket. Will my skull join them?
    This is for Momma. I have to be strong.
    The witch doctor is humming.
    "Sit down. The ancestors have told me many things about you
and your mother's sickness."
    I sit on a small rickety stool in front of her. She waves her withered,
dry hand over the vapors escaping from the pot. Sparks erupt in red
and yellow. She speaks to the pot, as if someone hides there.
    Bubbles float from the bottom of the pot and explode on the
surface, multiplying into hundreds more. The mixture is thick and
black like the color of cow's blood after it has cooled.
    I jump when she shrieks, "Spirits of old, accept this sacrifice to
atone for the sins of this woman."
    Fear grabs my stomach, and I lurch forward as if someone has
pushed me from behind. My soul burns. Something sticks deep
inside me, trying to make its way back up. A cold, sweaty chill runs
down my back.
    "Turn your wrath away from our people--let it be quenched
before the end of this night."
    Her hand sways heavy in the air, then crashes downward,
releasing a white powder over the fire. Immediately, I'm light-headed.
Everything appears murky and moves in slow motion. My head feels
like a huge block of wood. All fear escapes me and rushes into the
1 1 2 T o m Da v i s




fire. The flames lick the lips of the black-sooted pot, reveling in some
kind of victory. This is the end.
    I picture my momma's face.
    "May you receive the payment of this child's blood! Release
your curse and cease your hatred of the evil in which this family has
partaken."
    Quick as a cobra, she grabs my arm. I yell. I am suddenly alert.
And scared. I don't want to die by being thrown into a boiling pot.
    With one hand she raises my arm in the air, and with her other
she waves a glimmering steel blade.
    No more sickness, no more death, Momma will live. I take one
last deep breath and close my eyes.
    A burning, searing pain shoots through my arm and engulfs the
rest of my body. I want to yell again, but my mouth will not work.
My lips are swollen into two large stones. Thick, wet goo pours
down my arm. I open my eyes and the witch doctor is worshipping
the kettle, eyes rolled in the back of her head, two white orbs
twitching violently. Her mouth lies open, the pink inside alive and
pulsating. Blood drips from my wrist to my elbow and splashes on
the fire.
    A moment later, her eyes return.
    "It is finished."
    She releases my arm and hands me a towel.
    "Keep pressure on the wound until it stops."
    I am confused. "Is that it?"
    "The ancestors are pleased. They receive your sacrifice and
remove their curse."
    "But I thought I ... the blood sacrifice. I thought ..."
Scared                                                            113




    I am dizzy again. I look at the wound on my hand. It is small.
    "What did you think?"
    "That I would have to give my life as a sacrifice ..."
    "Goodness no, child. Go home now. Everything will be put back
in its proper place."
    My legs shake and wobble. When I reach the fresh, cool air, my
senses start to come back to life. My head clears enough to see what's
in front of me. My gait is slow and steady.
    I was prepared to die. Now, a jubilation rises in me: Everything
will be all right. Momma will be well, and we will all be fine!
    As the fog continues to clear, my legs move faster. Momma's
probably already well! The witch doctor said the ancestors were
appeased. The thought of my mother regaining her strength focuses
me. I can't wait to see her smile. The leaves run with me and swirl as
I run to Auntie's door.
    Bursting in without waiting for invitation, I call out to her.
    "Momma, oh Momma, are you well?"
    I stop. Precious and Abu follow my lead and stand as still as
statues. She is on that same bed. It looks as if she has not moved
a centimeter. I smell the pungent stench of human waste. She is
smaller than last time, her frame so frail. Her arms are twigs, like
starter wood for a fire.
    When she sees me, her eyes open, but only halfway. They are the
yellow of puss. Her hand reaches out to me slowly, trembling and
jerky, resting on my shoulder. She does not look human.
    Why isn't she better? The witch doctor, the ancestors promised!
Maybe it takes time. She'll be well in a few short days. Then everything
will be back to normal.
1 1 4 T o m Da v i s




    Abu and Precious press up next to me. The smiles on their faces
quickly turn into frown. They see what I have seen.
    Abu scuttles to the corner, buries his head in his little hands and
begins to cry.
    I bend down to Momma. "Everything is okay. You will be well
again. I promise!"
    She is whispering something, but I can't hear. I strain to hear
her words.
    "A-A-Add-ddaaa-nnna. I love you."
    "I love you too, and it is going to be okay. The ancestors told the
witch doctor. Just wait, Momma, just wait."
    The pain in my arm pricks at me. Dried, speckled blood spreads
out from my wrist and forearm and draws a crimson line down the
middle.
    "I made the sacrifice. It's done, all will be restored. She told me."
    Her fingers slowly, methodically, caress my hair. Her hand and
touch are familiar, and I know it is beginning. She is becoming well.
My head rests on her bony frame but she grimaces in pain. Instead, I
lie down on the hard, dirty floor at her feet and fall asleep.
    Some time later, maybe an hour, maybe two, I'm awakened by
being dragged across the floor.
    "What are you doing in this house? Didn't I tell you not to come
here? What's the matter with you, girl?"
    Auntie D is yelling at the top of her lungs like I committed a
terrible crime.
    "I thought Momma would be well. The witch doctor promised."
    "Did you go see the witch doctor? Because if you did, she's gonna
come asking me for the money."
Scared                                                          115




    "No, she came to me. She told me my sacrifice would make the
ancestors happy. I came here to see Momma get well. To take her
home."
    "What's that on your arm, girl?"
    "It's nothing."
    "Don't you lie to me. Let me see it."
    "No, don't touch it, it hurts. The witch doctor did it."
    "You don't know what you are messing with."
    "She promised Momma would get well."
    "Witch doctors sometimes do great things, and sometimes they
do nothing. You can't depend on them." She calms down as suddenly
as she had exploded in anger. I don't like how quickly she goes from
angry to kind. "Adanna, I think it is time we had a talk. Your mom is
very, very sick, and she will soon go to meet the ancestors. We need
to discuss how things are going to be for you and your brother and
sister from now on."
    "But the witch doc--"
    "I don't want to be hearing anything about the witch doctor.
When she dies, you're gonna be all alone. Uncle Malako and I will
help you as much as we can. But you know we are poor and don't
have much to share."
    I hardly believe that's true, but I say nothing.
    "I have children of my own to take care of," Auntie continues.
"But don't you worry, you will be just fine. There are people making
it who are in worse shape than you."
    "But--"
    "No, no, no. You are a big girl, Adanna."
    The witch doctor promised me everything would be okay, and
1 1 6 T o m Da v i s




everything is falling apart. Everything is not okay. I am so sad. So
confused.
    Momma stirs in the corner, only slightly. More like the last
twitching of a rat caught in a trap than a human being lying
underneath covers. She moans, coughs, and tries to breathe; it is a
struggle.
    The tears burn with bitterness. And now I am angry. I am angry
at the world, angry at the witch doctor, angry to be alone, even
angry at the illuminated man. Especially him.
    I run out the door. Stinging tears run down my face, into my
mouth.
    I keep running, not sure where I am heading at first. Then I
know. I have to see Pastor Walter. He's the only one who will help.
He will be at the care point.
    I race past people going about their lives. They are a blur. I do
not care who they are or if I know them. I see the empty houses
of the people we used to sit with and share meals with at church.
They are empty. The people, gone. Like Daddy, like Uncle Sipo,
like Momma. My tears come again, and I do not care who sees
me cry.
    I slow when I come to the care point, but my legs are weak. I
can barely walk. I stumble through a crowd of people, white men,
about ten of them. They wear strange hats, like they're going on
a safari. One is holding a bottle of liquid they use on their hands
every time they touch one of us. One holds out his hand to me with
candy. But I don't like these white people today.
    Where is Pastor Walter? I walk unsteadily to the supply building.
    "Adanna, what are you doing in here?"
Scared                                                            117




     Words won't come out of my mouth. I try, but my lips won't
move, and my mind is blank.
     "Are you okay?"
     My shoulders heave, my nose runs, and salty water continues to
pour from my eyes. I am wailing like a baby.
     He is kind, like a father might be. He walks to me and holds
me, silently at first. I willingly fall into his chest and for a moment,
I feel safe.
     "There, there, girl, everything will be all right. Pastor Walter is
here."
                      Chapter Twelve

432 234
    Adanna

Pastor Walter wasn't always such a warm and gentle man. Years ago
he was more like a painting of a person that looks good from far away
but not so good when you get up close.
    Before the church building was added to the care point closer to
my home, we had to walk ten kilometers to church every Sunday. I had
only one dress, just for Sunday. One morning, I decided to wear my
dress to go out and play. Once Momma found out, she marched me
right back into the house. She made it clear with a vigorous wag of her
finger and her firm hand on my back that this was not a dress for play.
It was white with little pink flowers and green leaves and had a pretty
bow in the back. Momma soaked and scrubbed our nice clothes every
Saturday using a bar of soap we didn't use for much else. I can picture all
of our Sunday clothes hanging on the line outside our house--my dress,
Momma's long frock with brown, orange, and green leaves scattered
from top to bottom, and Precious's little pink dress. She always washed
Daddy's good clothes too, even when he had not worn them. But even
when he was home, Daddy never would go with us to the church. "So
many lies coming out of that preacher's mouth," he always said. Momma
would just cluck her tongue and shake her head, but she never argued
with him about church. This was before Abu came along.

                                  118
Scared                                                            119




    I can remember sitting with Momma in church on long benches,
singing "What a Friend We Have in Jesus" and a song called "Abba,
Father."
    Young and old voices and hands would rise to heaven. When the
people of our village got sick and started dying, even people in our
church, everyone wanted answers. The grown-ups all had the same
question, Whose fault is this? But everyone had a different answer.
Some church people said we had sinned against God. Others swore
the dark wave of death came from our ancestors. Some even said the
white people had poured the disease into our water and poisoned
our food.
    We had only two places to go for answers: the witch doctor and
the church. The witch doctor has been here a long time. I never quite
understood how she worked, and sometimes I was scared of her, but
people in our village believed she has been given great power by the
ancestors.
    Tobile's Uncle Sahile told him the ancestors turn people who do
really bad things into zombies. The zombies come out at night and do
awful things to people, though I am not sure what. For months after
I heard about zombies, I could not close my eyes without picturing
their decaying bodies and empty eyes.
    When I asked my daddy about this, he stood up with his arms
out like a big monster, opened his eyes wide, and lumbered about
the house, chasing me. When he caught me, he laughed and said,
"Adanna, don't believe everything you hear." But I know he visited
the witch doctor at least once, after a tree from the forest fell on his
leg. That was when he cut timber for the government in Bulembu.
He worked sixteen hours a day with hardly any pay. He was angry
1 2 0 T o m Da v i s




and jumpy as a bush snake. His leg got better, but he always had a
slight limp after that.
    When I imagine the ancestors, I picture giant spirits with red
eyes swirling around and watching us, waiting for someone to make
a mistake. We kill our animals trying to make them happy, but I
don't know what they could possibly want with dead animals.
    Tobile and I were allowed to sit in the back of a circle séance one
night. The witch doctor danced around like a crazy chicken, her long,
pale, bony fingers pulling the unseen down into the air around us.
Afterward, I could not get the sickly sweet odor of smoke off me.
    My mother believes in ancestors and witch doctors, God and
church, and Pastor Walter. I am still trying to figure out what I
believe, but I am certain now that it won't include witch doctors.
    Unless Momma suddenly gets better.
    I think I believe in church, though. At least, I want to. First of
all, it is free. It does not cost money or animals ... or blood sacrifice.
Pastor Walter talks about blood and sacrifice sometimes, but he doesn't
ask us for our animals. He says Jesus took the place of the animals. I'm
not quite sure what that means, but it makes me feel better.
    Before he changed, Pastor Walter scared me. After our singing
time, which I loved, he would preach, sometimes for two hours! He
paced back and forth at the front of the room, his face sweaty and his
voice getting louder and louder. Sometimes he banged his fist, or the
Word of God, on the table to wake us up.
    One day, Pastor spoke about "the truth that is in Jesus."
    "From the book of Ephesians," he shouted. "You must put on
the new self. He who has been stealing must steal no longer! He must
work that he may have something to share with those in need."
Scared                                                           121




    Pastor Walter talked about Jesus' church--where everyone shared
with everyone else. Not only food, but homes, money, everything.
    Sitting in the service that morning, my mind drifted as he spoke.
I tried to think past the ache in my stomach, in my bones, even, it
seemed, in my hair. I hadn't eaten in days. As Pastor spoke, I thought
of fresh roasted corn, succulent fruit, tons of beans--hunks of
meat--and my mouth watered. If the good news about Jesus' church
was true, maybe there would be food for me someday soon.
    When he was finished, I waited for Pastor at the back of the
church.
    "Pastor, I'm so excited about the church of Jesus!"
    "Yes, dear, it is wonderful, isn't it?"
    "Oh it is, almost too good to be true."
    But he was walking away. I couldn't let him go. I couldn't think
of suffering through another day without eating.
    "Pastor Walter, wait."
    "Yes, what is it, child?"
    "I-I want you to know that I am one of those people you talked
about today."
    "People? What do you mean?"
    "I am one of the hungry. Pastor Walter, my brother, sister, and I
have not eaten in days."
    He looked at me with a question mark on his face. Then he gave
a small smile and put his hand on my shoulder.
    "Oh, that's only a story, an example of how people are supposed
to live."
    "You mean it's not true?" My lips tightened. I could feel the
blood rushing out of my face.
1 2 2 T o m Da v i s




    "Oh, it's true, you just need faith to receive it."
    "What do you mean?"
    "Just believe! All things are possible to him who believes."
    "But I've believed all this time, and I'm still hungry."
    "God's just testing you to see if you really trust Him." He patted
my shoulder again.
    And with that, he walked off. It was plain to me that day. He was
just talking dry wind to all of us.
    I could not understand how people are supposed to share with
those in need but God would not permit them to share with me
because I'm being tested.
    But Pastor Walter kept speaking these things. Often he would get
all excited and start yelling at us, telling what would happen when
the kingdom of God came. I started to get tired of waiting for it.
    One day, that changed. Pastor Walter was in front of the church
speaking, getting all excited. I could see his spit fly out toward the
people in the front row. He talked about the true power of a Christian.
Power to pray for things and receive them, the power of faith "calling
forth things that are not as though they were." I asked someone about
this, and they told me you can pray to God for something you want
and He will deliver it. They said it worked for the Americans.
    After church, everyone got up to leave except for one person. A
little boy I have known since I was a baby remained alone, still lying
next to the wall. Everyone thought he was asleep. His momma had
died from the bad disease, so she was not around to wake him up. He
had no one else to look out for him. Pastor Walter tried to wake him.
Pastor Walter's voice made me stop and turn to look:
    "Hey, boy! It's time to go now. A church is no place to sleep!
Scared                                                              123




Boy, do you hear me? What's the matter with you, sleeping in God's
house like this?"
    He walked over to the dusty corner. The wind blew, dirt swirled,
and a few leaves rested on his clothes. I can still hear the echoes of his
black dress shoes stomp on the cement floor.
    "I told you it's time to go home!"
    He kicked at him gently with his foot, but the little boy wouldn't
wake up. So Pastor Walter started dragging him by the shirt toward
the door. This wouldn't have been too hard to do--Tlonge was so
skinny. He was also completely filthy; he didn't own a pair of shoes,
and his clothes were nothing more than used rags. My memory of his
clothes and face are so clear even now.
    Pastor Walter reached down with both hands to pick him up and
escort him out the door. But then he froze. It must have been the
touch of Tlonge's skin that did it. Cold, clammy, like the outside of a
banana skin. I know because I hugged him after everyone left.
    "Tlonge? Tlonge? Wake up, boy, Oh dear Jesus!"
    Walter began to cry, slowly at first. He touched Tlonge, more
tenderly now, feeling his neck and the side of his face. His sobs
turned into gasping heaves as he caressed Tlonge in his arms and
held him close to his chest. Pastor Walter cried like I have never seen
a man cry in my life. It filled the whole church and poured out into
the streets.
    From that day, Walter was a different man. He even looked
different. His eyes and face were softer. He brought food from his
house to share after every service, feeding as many children as he
could. There were times when my only meal for the week came after
those Sunday-morning services. Once in a while he even came to my
1 2 4 T o m Da v i s




home with a small meal for our family. It wasn't much, he said, but
it was all he had. I believed him.
    Tlonge's death snapped something inside Pastor Walter that
needed to be broken.
    This is the Pastor Walter whose arms embrace me now.


"Adanna, dear, dear. What's the matter, my child?"
    My lips attempt to form words, but nothing comes out. My nose
runs like a river and the tears are as big as raindrops.
    "There, there. You tell Pastor Walter everything. I am here for
you."
    After what seems like hours, the words finally pour out.
    "My momma, she is sick, Pastor Walter! She has the deadly
disease. I went to the witch doctor." I show him my arm, the blood
now congealed in an ugly, jagged line. "But it did not help and now
Momma is going to die!"
    "Oh, Adanna. What has been done to you?" He shakes his head,
and his eyes tear up. Tears for me.
    "I have prayed for you and spent many nights awake thinking about
what to do. It's a terrible thing, but God will see you through."
    "I am so scared to be alone. What will I do? How will I take care
of Precious and Abu? How will I feed them?"
    "These are hard times. But I will do all I can to be by your side.
To help you, to love you, to take care of you." He takes his face in my
hands. "You can count on it."
    All of this is hard to believe. I feel as if I am trapped in a nightmare
and cannot wake up. My fingers claw at my skin with all their might,
but to no use. I will not wake up because this is not a dream.
Scared                                                            125




    Pastor Walter hands me a bundle.
    "Take this maize and beans. It's not much but some foreigners
were kind enough to bring it so we have hope for a few days."
    The words "Thank you" escape my mouth and I'm grateful for
these minutes with Walter. I feel loved and protected. The warmth of
his hands, the way he looks into my eyes, and the gentle caressing of
my back gives me a glimpse into a father's heart. I could get by on less
food if that kind of love was a part of my life all the time.
    Having a father like that would mean never being scared again.
    I let the best memories of my own father fill my head. I remember
the last day I saw him. It was like any other day. He got up early,
and he fixed breakfast for the family--he even had special rolls he'd
brought back from the city. He kissed Momma good-bye, and never
came back. My last memory of him is with his back turned, walking
away.
    After this memory fades, I look up to see that a white man has
stepped into the room with Pastor Walter and me. He has dark wavy
hair, down past his neck, pulled back into a ponytail.
    He walks to where Pastor and I are sitting.
    "Hi, Walter." Pastor grabs his hand and pumps it up and down.
    "Stuart, so good to see you."
    Then his chalky white hand thrusts through the air like someone
jabbing a stick at me.
    "Saw--Sawubona." He is trying to say hello in S'swati.
    I do the American thing like Pastor Walter and shake his hand,
with my right hand, not my left.
    "Hello to you. I speak English."
    "You do. Yes, and very well, I see."
1 2 6 T o m Da v i s




    "I studied English in school."
    "My name is Stuart. What's yours?"
    "I am Adanna."
    "I am sorry your mom is sick."
    I look up at him and nod. I cannot imagine why he is talking to
me. My foot kicks the ground lazily and dust flies in the air.
    Pastor Walter stands up.
    "Adanna, Stuart is from the United States. He is here with
Gordon--maybe you have seen Gordon with me. The tall white man
who sometimes comes to our church."
    "He's very loud," the man named Stuart says. He looks at me,
not in a bad way, but I can tell he is studying me. It makes me aware
of the rags I am wearing and the dirt crusted on my arms and legs.
He is wearing a blue T-shirt with a horse and rider on his chest.
    "Oh, maybe." I wish I could just disappear.
    The white man speaks kindly, but it seems to take effort.
    "Mr. Gordon is a writer, and I am a photographer. We are here
to do a story about your beautiful country and your people for a
newspaper back in the U.S."
    "Our country is not as pretty as it used to be."
    "Maybe things can change, become better for you and your
people."
    He answers quickly, like someone trying to catch overflowing
water from one pot to another. I am not feeling polite today. Can
he not see the difference between his perfect, clean clothes and these
filthy things I have on?
    "Look around." My voice is scratchy, but I am surprised at how
strong it sounds. "Everyone is dying; we have no food to eat."
Scared                                                             127




    "I really can't begin to imagine how hard it must be." He
bends down close to me. "I know we just met, but can I give you
something?"
    "Okay."
    He takes a bright orange daypack off his back.
    "This backpack has some food in it--crackers, bread, and cheese.
It's not much, but I want you to have it."
    "Thank you, mister." Maybe I misjudged him.
    I stand up to go, but I am very wobbly. The white man puts
his arm around my shoulder and guides me into a chair. His hand
brushes across the fresh knife wound on my arm, and I wince.
    "Sorry. I'm so sorry." His eyes fix on the cut.
    "What happened to your arm?"
    Pastor Walter steps up. "Adanna, why don't you put your head
down here for a few minutes. I will help you get home after you have
some rest."
    I lie like a worm on a worn mat, holding onto the stained, orange
backpack.
    Pastor Walter moves to the back of the room and motions for
Stuart to join him. They talk in low voices, but I can hear them.
    "Stuart, this child is at the end of herself. You cannot believe what
she has endured. Today, she got it into her mind to see the witch doctor,
to give a blood sacrifice--she believed this would make her mother
well. Her mother is very sick with AIDS and could die any day now."
    "A witch doctor did that to her?"
    "I am fighting against this kind of superstition, but it is strong
with our people. We need to make sure she gets the knife wound
cleaned, so it doesn't get infected."
1 2 8 T o m Da v i s




     I realize now that another man has joined them. This must be
Gordon. He is indeed loud.
     "I have a first-aid kit in the car," says the man who must be
Gordon. "There's some disinfectant and antibiotic in there. I'll go
get it."
     "Yes, yes, good idea. Please do."
     The white men spread a jelly and solution on my arm that burns
me. I can't help but wince, though I try not to show it. Then they
place a big brown bandage over it.
     "There you go, good as new," Stuart says.
     "Thank you."
     "You are more than welcome," Gordon says.
     "Why don't we all escort you home," Pastor Walter says.
     "Okay."
     I'm not sure I want them to see my home. There's nothing to see.
Not much of anything really. On the walk over, I think it's a good
idea to keep them outside. Less questions, less I have to say.
     When we arrive, I know it was the right decision. The white
men--especially the dark-haired one--try to hide their dismay, but
I can see it in their eyes. "Thank you all so much. Perhaps I will see
you again soon."
     "Oh, okay. Yeah. That would be nice." The man named Stuart
is very strange.
     "Sala kahle." I say.
     "Good-bye, dear," Pastor Walter says. And they walk away.
                    Chapter Thirteen

Gordon drops me back at the hotel.
    "Meet you in the morning for breakfast, partner," he yells as he
pulls away. That man is tireless.
    I head up to my room and lie back on the bed. I am wiped out,
but I can't sleep. I still haven't recovered from the jet lag. The kids
at the care point are messing with my heart. I'm not supposed to
get close to these people. That's how I stay sane. But then again ...
I haven't been sane for a long time. I think of Adanna--the long
scar on her arm. I think of the crazy church service and those words
"Feed my sheep." Did that even happen, or was I caught up in the
moment?
    Whitney has had me bent over laughing with stories of growing
up in her Southern pew-jumping church--it was something like
"Attapulgus Free Church of the Gospel, Holy Spirit." On revival
Sunday, about once a month, she and her brothers were "encouraged"
to go to the front of the church and get thumped on the forehead.
Something about being slammed by the Spirit. Or slain. Either way,
it sounds violent and wrong. But Whit and her closest brother didn't
really feel anything during those moments. They just played along,
like it was a game. They'd lie there on the ground for a while, then
peek at each other and nod when they thought it was okay to get up.

                                    129
1 3 0 T o m Da v i s




    I wonder how many people just play along in non-pew-jumping
churches.
    I miss Whitney. I need to talk to her, to hear her voice.
    I dig the phone out of my bag. It still has a little charge left in
it. I take the elevator up to the pool and walk over to a chair on the
far side. A white-haired man and a much younger blonde woman are
treading water near each other in the deep end. He is clearly flirting
with her, and it is obvious to me that it's working.
    The phone rings once, twice.
    "Hello?"
    "Whit, hey it's Stuart."
    "You made it! I was starting to worry since I hadn't heard from
you."
    "Just so you know, cell service here is hit and miss. I can only get
one bar up here by the pool. I could lose you any second."
    "It's good to hear your voice."
    "Oh, and my battery is low. So this will probably have to be quick."
    "Okay ..."
    "Sorry, I just wanted to get that out of the way. Um ... it's really
good to hear your voice, too." I'm really not sure what to say. I guess
that's because I'm not sure how I feel.
    "Is everything okay?"
    "Gordon and I went to a care point today, to talk to the kids and
take pictures. It's hard for me to even describe the scene. These kids,
they have no one."
    "What do you mean, `no one'?"
    "I mean no one. Their parents and uncles and aunts have all died.
There are seven-year-old kids parenting siblings. I met this one girl,
Scared                                                          131




Adanna, she's probably no older than eleven or twelve, and her mom
is dying of AIDS, so what does she do? She goes to the witch doctor.
And all that did was get her a nice scar on her wrist where the quack
sliced her open to spill her blood."
    "That's horrible."
    "Pastor Walter, the guy who's trying to help a lot of these kids
here--man, you should hear his story--he is working with aid
organizations to help kids get food, but they're not very reliable.
Gordon and I gave this Adanna some crackers and a few little things
I had. But it hardly feels like we did anything at all."
    "It sounds unreal, Stu." Her voice is quiet.
    "This whole trip is unreal."
    There is an awkward silence. I know she wants to talk about "us,"
but I'm not ready to go there. Not yet. There's too much swirling in
my mind.
    "I went to church," I finally say.
    "Did you say `church'?"
    I laugh. "Well I didn't plan on it. It just happened. Gordon and
I interviewed this incredible Swazi woman--reminded me a lot of
Wangari."
    "So she took you to church?"
    "Well, after we ate dinner, we went for a walk. By the way, this
is a really beautiful place, you know, aside from the starvation and
AIDS wiping out most of the population."
    "Lovely word picture. Don't quit your day job." She lets those
words simmer for a moment before continuing. "So what happened
at church?"
    "The place was packed, but it wasn't like any church service I've
1 3 2 T o m Da v i s




been too. Mostly it was children and older women--I think the
grandmotherly types are called gogos or something like that. Anyway,
they were singing, that's what caught our attention while we were out
walking. I have to admit, it almost choked me up it was so beautiful."
    More silence.
    "Stu? Are you still there? You're breaking up a bit."
    "Sorry. I can tell you about it another time. But it was ... surreal.
And a bit freaky, too, because I heard a voice ..."
    "Stu, I didn't catch that last bit ..."
    "I said it was a bit freaky. That's all."
    "I'm glad you went to church. I think that's a good thing. Maybe
it will help you ... us. I mean, it would at least put us in the same
place on Sundays."
    "Yeah." When was the last time I went to church with Whitney?
Months ago? Years? Whitney breaks yet another silence.
    "Stuart, this isn't exactly how I pictured telling you what I'm
about to say ... but I have some important news ..."
    "Okay." That sounds ominous. Is this about us? Or a friend? Is
someone sick ... or dead?
    "Is everything okay?"
    "Yes, except I'm--" She stops talking.
    "Whit, are you still there?"
    "Stuart, I, I mean we, are going to have a baby."
    I drop the phone. It bounces once, then skitters toward the pool,
stopping short of falling in. I quickly pick it up and hold the receiver
to my ear.
    "Whit, are you still there? Whitney?"
    Silence.
                   Chapter Fourteen

432 234
    Adanna

My journal was a gift from a lovely grandmother named Frida who
came from a place called Finland. On the cover of the journal there
is the face of a woman with shiny silver hair that flows from the
front to the back of the book. She has deep blue eyes, like my friend
Frida, and her eyelids are shaded in blue, teal, and silver. Two small
teardrops run from her left eye, and two elegant birds rest atop her
head, their beaks meeting in the middle to create a queenly crown. I
have never seen anything so beautiful. Frida said the woman on the
book is a Nordic ice queen.
    I have only seen ice once in my life, in a cup of Coca-Cola. I
asked if I could touch it, and a nice white man said yes. He poured
the Coke into his hand until two perfectly clear cubes fell out and the
brown, syrupy liquid oozed between his fingers and onto the ground.
He handed me one and threw the other in his mouth and crunched
it between his teeth. This little square burned my hand and made me
tingle when I held it too long. I put it in my mouth too and bore
down on it with my teeth like the white man.
    Frida's language sounds strange to me. I told her so, and she
laughed. "Your language sounds like Greek to me!" She knows
English, and so do I, so we would talk about all kinds of things

                                133
1 3 4 T o m Da v i s




together. When Frida would come, my momma would smile, and
they would exchange a warm Swazi greeting. Precious would come
running, and Frida would welcome her; but Momma knew this was
my special time, and she would keep Precious and baby Abu away.
She knew Frida was a special teacher, and my mother wanted me to
learn as much as I could.
    Frida told me her home was as different from mine as night is
from day. She said it was cold, ten times as cold as it has ever been
here! She also spoke of something called snow that falls from the sky.
It is like a blanket of frozen white cotton all over the ground. I told
her I've never seen cotton.
    There are words written in Frida's language on my journal. Frida
told me they were from a poem called "Tears," by a woman from
England named Elizabeth Barrett Browning. She lived a long time
ago, and she and her husband both wrote many poems about life,
and especially about love. Frida told me what the words on my book
say: Soon in long rivers down the lifted face / And leave the vision clear
for stars and sun. Frida told me what comes before these lines in the
poem, so I wrote them all on the first page of my journal, in my
language and in English.


       Those tears will run
       Soon in long rivers down the lifted face,
       And leave the vision clear for stars and sun.


    Frida came to visit our village twice a week for three months. She
always came to my home to find me so we could talk about poetry.
She told me the "Tears" poem is about life and sadness, but that it is
Scared                                                             135




also about being able to see things more clearly because of the tears.
All we have to do to see is lift our faces up to heaven, to God. Frida
believes in God and talked about Him often. She said He is the
author of life, creative power, and words. He gives these things and
is these things. I do not completely understand this mystery, as Frida
called it, but her thoughts bring me comfort, like life is somehow
bigger than I know.
      "Poetry is a beautiful art form, Adanna."
      "I thought art was something you look at."
      "Well, art is a way of looking at life and expressing what you see,
from your perspective, through your eyes. With poetry, you use the
power of words instead of a paintbrush to express the beauty and awe
of life, and also things that bring pain and sadness."
      "Kind of like a thunderstorm?" I exclaimed. This made sense to
me.
      "Yes, exactly like a thunderstorm." Frida's blue eyes lit up when
she was excited. Talking about poetry made her eyes very bright.
      "You know how, in the midst of the frightening thunderstorm,
you stop to enjoy its beauty? You marvel at the power of the lightning
strike, you ponder the life the rain brings to the ground to bring
forth food, and you wonder who made it all?" She said all this with
her arm around me, looking toward the heavens.
      "I do wonder about those things."
      "That's poetry."
      She taught me about poetry and language, about words, verse,
and meter, the rhythm of language, and helped me learn how to
express my deepest thoughts. She knew many poems by heart. I had
a thousand questions, but Frida was always patient and kind. She
1 3 6 T o m Da v i s




said she loved my curiosity. I cried the day she was leaving. Frida
cried too. But I am glad I got to say good-bye to her.
    Before she left, she wrote a note in my journal:


            Adanna, it was a gift for me to meet you, and you
      are a gift to the world. Keep pondering the deep things
      of life. Keep using your gift to express your wonderful
      thoughts.
                                                   Your friend,
                                                         Frida


    I was lonely when she left, even though she said she would return
some day.
    I have named my journal Frida after the kind woman who gave
it to me. Frida is a source of comfort when life hurts, like a hot cup
of tea on a cold, wet day. And that is a real luxury. When I open
my journal and see a blank page, my pen goes to work. As I write, a
world emerges that is my own. Something about this fills me, even as
I let go of my thoughts and feelings.
    My favorite thing to do in the whole world is write poetry.
Momma says it was my grandma's gift too. I wrote a poem for Frida
in my journal. Maybe I will give it to her some day.
    I wrote this one just a few days ago:


      I see the path, edged with tall grass
      Where you walked, to come home.
      And I wait.
      For your big loving smile, strong arms
Scared                                                            137




       To protect me from harm. Wait--
       I see you coming as you did, calling my name,
       Eyes toward home. My heart leaps,
       And then falls when I wake.
       Father of my dreams.
       The dirt path is empty, and so is my heart.


    That's a poem about my daddy. He'll never get to read it, but
I wrote it for him anyway. Or maybe I wrote it for me. Either way,
it is what I would want to say to him if he were here. Maybe one
day, he will come back to get me. I hope he still remembers he has
a daughter.
    Sometimes at night I am scared, but Frida keeps me company. I
sit against my bed and write as long as I can after Precious and Abu
are asleep, except for the times when I do not have anything to write
with or a candle to give me light to work by. Candles are expensive,
but Pastor Walter gave me a package of them he got from an aid
organization. I use them only a little at a time so I can stretch their
life as long as possible. When it's windy, the air blows right through
my house. It causes the candle flame to bend, making the wax run,
and ruining it. I never read or write in a storm. I have only one
candle left.
    "Abu, Precious, come eat your breakfast." It is the last of the food
the white men gave us.
    "Adanna, the food has been so nice! Do you think the white
people will give us more?"
    "It is hard to say, Precious. One day food is here, the next it
is gone. That is our life. With God's help, we will have enough for
1 3 8 T o m Da v i s




tomorrow." This is something Momma would tell me. After Daddy
left us, she started answering a lot of her questions by saying, "With
God's help ..."
    "Are we going to see Momma today? I miss her." Precious starts
to cry, and so does Abu. I hate when they cry.
    "Okay, no more crying." I do not care what Auntie D says; we
want to see our mother.
    "Yes, today, we will go to see her."
    Smiles light their faces.
    "Just make sure you put on your warm clothes."
    "But we don't have any warm clothes," Precious reminds me.
    "Just put on momma's green sweater."
    "But she'll get mad."
    "Just do what I say. And make sure Abu is wrapped in the
blanket."


The walk to Auntie D's takes longer than usual. The weather is
changing and the temperature is dropping, and we must walk against
the wind. Dirt sticks in our eyes and coats our throats. Leaves rocket
through the air as if they're arrows. Gnarled, ancient trees line the
path. People say they are thousands of years old and our greatest
treasures. A few even believe the dead live in those trees and watch
our every move. Whatever they are, I do not like them much. They
scare me.
    When we round the bend, I can tell something strange is going
on. Narrowing my eyes to focus reveals flashes of color. I grab Abu
by his tiny, bony hand, and my walk turns to a jog.
    "Adanna, don't go so fast. 'Low down, okay?"
Scared                                                          139




    "Just hurry up. C'mon, Precious."
    A figure runs toward us.
    "Adanna, you must have heard. I was just on my way to get you.
Come quickly." Beads of sweat are forming on his brow and he's
breathing hard.
    "What is wrong, Uncle?" But I already know.
    "Hurry along. You'll soon see."
    My world becomes a blur. Uncle Malako pulls me by the arm so
hard my shoulder is about to come out of its socket. The jerk opens
my wound and small droplets of blood drip down my arm.
    Several small groups of people stand in front of the house
weeping, moaning, lifting their hands to the sky, and muttering
prayers to ancestors or gods.
    I maneuver between them with my head down, not wanting
anyone to see who I am. It works.
    The inside of the house is flooded with people. Our village elder
grabs me, holds me, and kisses me. I twist to get away. Where is my
momma? Women have grabbed Precious and Abu, but I take Abu
into my own arms and pull Precious by her little hand.
    After pressing and squeezing through the crowd, we emerge as if
from an underground cave to her bedside.
    "Is that Momma?" Precious looks up at me with a quivering lip.
    That's not our Momma. The flesh is falling off of her face. Her
skin is not the beautiful brown of my momma's. It looks more like
melted candle wax. Bones stick out where they shouldn't. Two huge
lumps hang lazily over her eyes, a once well-rounded chin now
hangs lifeless like a rock, her mouth gaped open exposing teeth like
a dead cow's.
1 4 0 T o m Da v i s




    My belly starts to erupt. I turn and in one motion hand Abu
to a woman behind me and pull Precious with all my force through
the bodies and outside. Vomit spews, the acid burns my throat and
ignites in my mouth like fire. This is the taste of my life.
    I drop to my knees and pound my fists against the hard earth.
The cold wind whips the dirt and dust around me. From somewhere
inside, my voice rises.
    "Momma! Momma!" I scream.
    Ten fingers close on my shoulders, a grip as strong as a gorilla,
and pull me up. It's Uncle Malako. The vomit, now matted with
dirt and sand, still trickles from my mouth as I'm forced to my feet.
Everyone is staring at me.
    "Go pay respects to your mother." Uncle Malako leads me back
into the house. I do not know where Precious and Abu have gone.
    I bring my arms up to cover my face. Hands grip the back of my
neck. It's Auntie D.
    "Dear, dear child. My prayers were that this day would never
come. I am so sad for you, so brokenhearted for your family." She
says it loudly so everyone can hear.
    I say nothing. There are no words in my mind, no feelings in
my heart. I am numb all over. Nothing works right. I am not sure
my heart is beating, if my legs can walk, or my mouth can talk. It is
finished. And now life will never be the same.
    Auntie D shakes her head, fake tears in her voice.
    "Don't you worry, because Uncle Malako and I will help you,
protect you, and care for you."
    Every word she says is a lie. I think I'm going to be sick again.
    "You hear me, child?"
Scared                                                            141




    I nod.
    After being tossed around from relative to stranger, and stranger
to friend, I sneak away, quiet as a cockroach, and edge toward the
door. Even standing on my tiptoes I am not tall enough to see over
the ocean of bodies. Where are Abu and Precious?
    Oh, I wish I could talk with that man in my dream. He said his
name was "Whatever You Need." I need someone to tell me what to
do. I need someone to show me how to survive. I need help. I throw
a desperate prayer to the wind in hopes that he is close. That he hears.
Please, Illuminated Man, ruler of everything, help me!
    I hear nothing as I walk away from my mother.
    The sun burns bright, but the air is frigid. The wind has stopped,
but there is a new coldness now that Momma is gone. I feel it deep
down in my soul. Everything inside of me is being rearranged.
Every particle and every speck of dust that makes up who I am is
changing.
    My eyes scan the horizon. The world around me looks the same as
it was yesterday but it does not seem the same to me in this moment.
I do not want to go on. When everyone leaves, I will sneak back into
the house and lie next to Momma. Then I can die too.
    Two small figures escape the swarm of mourners like fish
escaping a hook. Abu and Precious run to me. I wonder what they
are thinking. Abu is just a baby. He only knows that his mommy is
not moving. He kept trying to talk to her. Nobody noticed him as he
poked her and asked if he could have something to drink.
    He has no idea of the event that has occurred. Abu will not
remember his mother, how she used to kiss him on the forehead
every night before he went to sleep, or how she would explode in
1 4 2 T o m Da v i s




laughter when he tried to form words. He won't know how great her
love was for him. He won't know how everyone in this community
loved her and looked up to her. But I will tell him.
    We are empty, without words. I look into their eyes, wipe away
their tears, and hug them. I want to tell them everything will be okay.
It is what they want to hear. I form the words in my thoughts but
cannot speak them.
    I grab their hands, and we walk. I am not sure where to go, but
we have to get away from Auntie's. It has become a place for the
dead, not the living.
    "Good-bye, my sweet Momma." I am done with tears today.
    We walk for hours, up hills, through the dry, wintered grass,
across the sandy riverbed where crystal water one flowed. Even Abu
does not care where we are or what we are doing.
    As we near our home, I pick up Abu. It is dark now, and this
time I am not afraid. If a wild beast eats me, it would be a comfort.
If I step on a black mamba, or if the ancestors devour me because I
step on their graves, let it be so.
    We stumble like drunk men into our home. Abu and Precious
walk to their mats and collapse. No good-night wishes or words of
sweet dreams are spoken.
    I feel half dead myself, but I am not ready to sleep. Grabbing
Frida, I begin to write.


       I had a dream, Momma,
       and in it the sky was blue as water;
       I was thirsty, but it was too high
       for me to lift my face and drink.
Scared                                        143




   Patches of green were scattered
   like emeralds over the red earth,
   but I had no hands
   and could not gather a treasure of grass
   to hold against my baby bird-like chest.


   Nothing was sound,
   and everything was broken.
   I looked for you, Momma,
   but you had gone.
   I woke up and lay on my mat
   weaving your name into a blanket
   to keep me warm.


   I tell myself
   that you aren't gone,
   you've only flown away,
   like a shining black bird
   and all your days are spent
   breaking twigs with your beak
   off the sticks that maim and beat
   To build a nest for your Precious,
   And for me and Abu.


   And we wait, mouths open
   Screeching with our dry mouths
   past the screams lodged deep
   inside our tiny throats.
1 4 4 T o m Da v i s




       Come back for us.
       Take us beyond the sky
       where you are.


    I fall into the deepest sleep.
    I see a small room filled with bones, shoes, clothes, and human
hair. An evil presence is near, a presence of destruction and death.
There are no living people, only the remnants of people. It is a lonely
place. I believe I am the last person on earth.
    Screaming and yelling rip through my home, but where is it
coming from? Voices pass through the walls and get louder and
louder. Now they're wailing and shouting my name.
    "Adannnnnaaaa, Adannnnnaaaa." What do they want with me?
Why can't I make them go away?
    With a jolt, my feet hit the floor. My body is wide awake. There
is a familiar voice coming from outside.
    "Adanna, open this door! It's Uncle Malako."
    Why does he sound so angry?
    With caution, I open the half-mended rusty gate that makes up
the front door. He could easily tear it down if he wanted.
    "Sorry, I was sleeping. How are you, Uncle?" My eye peers
through a crack in the door to make sure it is really him. "Uncle, are
you okay? You do not look so good."
    "Get out of my way. You have things in this house that belong
to me."
    "What are you talking about? Nothing in here is yours." I say the
words with boldness, but fear shoots through me.
    The whole house is awake. Abu wipes the sleep from his eyes
Scared                                                           145




and is about to unleash a battle cry because he is hungry. I know
that look.
    Uncle pushes me out of the way with such force I almost fall to
the ground. He steps in, carrying a large white bag made of canvas
and looks like the Devil clothed in flesh.
    "Uncle, this is our home, not yours!"
    "Shut up. That worthless mother of yours stole things that belong
to me. Now she's dead, and I'm taking what's rightfully mine."
    Deep anger rises in my chest.
    "Don't you talk about my momma like that!"
    Abu and Precious cower in the corner, holding on to each other.
Abu lets out a scream. We are terrified.
    "You are not welcome here with your cruel words about our
momma." I reach for all the inner strength I can gather to sound
older than I am. "Please, just go ..."
    "Don't tell me what to do, little girl. One more word, and I'll
make you sorry you ever lived. Abu, Precious, go play somewhere far
away."
    "But we don't want--"
    "Get out!"
    He grabs them both by their shirts and practically drags them
outside. My anger explodes like hurling knives. My hands fly up so
fast I can't stop them. The strike lands like a hammer on his back
and neck.
    "Get away from me, you stupid child."
    He doubles his fist and hits me squarely in the mouth. I fly into
the wall and slam against it with a sick thud. My eyes won't work
right. I am hurt. I am bleeding and helpless.
1 4 6 T o m Da v i s




        "These things belong to me."
        He is stealing everything in the house. There isn't much to take
except all my momma's special things--her brush, a silver necklace
with a red stone, our pots and pans. He stuffs them all into his soiled
and stained white bag.
        A few words gurgle out, "Why are you taking all of our things? I
thought you were going to help us?"
        "Help you? I've never liked your rotten family. You're vile rats.
Good for nothing."
        The bag draped over his shoulder is filled with everything we
own, and I am helpless to do anything about it.
        "If you say a word about this to anyone, I will kill you with my
bare hands. Do you understand me?"
        I nod in assent, knowing he means it. But he doesn't leave. He
stands in the doorway, staring like he might put me in that grimy
bag next.
        "You really are quite the pretty little thing, aren't you?"
        He lets the bag fall to the ground and skulks toward me like
a wolf. His anger has become something else. Something far more
evil.
        "Let me see that shoulder of yours. So beautiful and golden
brown, just like the girls I see in the big city."
        I clench my jaw and speak.
        "Just take that bag and leave."
        "I will take and do whatever I want."
        Quick as a diving hawk, he swings at me and rips my top off. He
touches me in places he shouldn't. My body shakes with panic. I'm
afraid he will kill me if I cry out.
Scared                                                        147




    "You just obey your uncle and everything will be fine."


I cry out for the illuminated man. "Where are you?"
    And then I see his face. So pure, so kind, filled with love and
light. I remember his gift. The scroll he put in my hand. But how
does it work? How can I use it to save me? What magic spell do I
have to say to escape this nightmare?
    I open my eyes, and Malako is putting his pants back on. He's
not my uncle anymore. He won't look at me, but I look at him. He
is not human. He is a demon.
    My body throbs with pain that I am certain will never go away.
He lifts the bag onto his shoulder and escapes like a cat.
    I'm left quivering on the floor, unable to move, wishing I were
dead.
                     Chapter Fifteen

The sunrise paints orange streams across the empty lobby as we walk
into the restaurant. It's been only days, but it feels like months have
passed since that strange night in the church. I grab coffee and walk
outside to meet Gordon.
    I usually don't like to sit in on interviews, but Gordon has again
insisted that this is one I don't want to miss. "What else would I be
doing at 6:00 a.m.?" I had said to Gordon last night.
    "Stuart, a man like Tagoze is worth getting up for," he responded.
    Whitney's bombshell kept me awake all night. And no matter
how hard I tried, I couldn't get the phone to work again.
    A mist has settled in the valley this morning. The clouds pass
quickly in front of the mountains as if they are late to an appointment.
The sun may not make it out today.
    In a matter of moments, Gordon pulls up in his Land Cruiser.
    "Good morning, my American friend."
    I jump into the passenger seat.
    I scowl a "Good morning," and we're off. I've never been a
morning person. If it wasn't for the rotgut coffee, I don't think I
could form words at all.
    We drive down the familiar paved roads until they intersect with
dirt paths that are more potholes than roads.

                                 148
Scared                                                             149




    "Sleep well?"
    "Yeah. Like a baby."
    "I know sarcasm when I hear it, my friend. And I know the hotel
isn't up to your impossible American standards, but it's not really
that bad, is it?"
    "No, the hotel is fine. It's great, actually." I don't really want to
have this conversation, but words spill out anyway. "It's just that
there's a lot on my mind, you know?"
    "This place will do that to you."
    "Yeah. That ... and I got a bit of surprising news last night."
    "News?"
    "My wife ... she's pregnant."
    "That's fantastic, man. Congratulations!" He thrusts out his
hand to give me a handshake, and the car swerves. He corrects but
doesn't seem fazed. "Is this your first?"
    "Yeah." First. It seems a rather unusual choice of words. Ominous,
in a way, like it's inevitable that we will have two, three, or a dozen
more.
    "I'm happy for you, my friend."
    "Thing is ... I dropped my cell phone right after she told me, and
I couldn't get it to work after that. I thought it was just the battery,
but I think I jarred something loose inside. I'm sure she thinks I'm
a real prize right now--having disappeared off the face of the earth
after hearing the news."
    "I'm sure she'll understand."
    "I'm not so sure. Things haven't been exactly ... um ... great
between us lately." Something occurs to me, and my stomach
bottoms. "Man, I hope it's mine."
1 5 0 T o m Da v i s




    "Wow, you two are really having problems. Do you really think
she would ... I'll just shut up. It's none of my business." But he can't
shut up. He's a reporter. "How far along is she?"
    "I don't even know. I thought about sending her an e-mail, but
the Internet wasn't working. And I have a feeling she doesn't want to
continue the conversation via e-mail."
    "Do you think she would cheat on you?"
    "I think I would cheat on me at this point. But ... I don't know.
I don't think so." We ride in silence, the clouds still hugging the
terrain and the dew falling on the windshield like rain. I've lost track
of the days, but I think it is Saturday.
    Loyalty is ingrained in Whitney's Southern fibers. She wouldn't
cheat on me. Besides, that would only give me one more reason to
leave. And if I know one thing about her in this time, it's that she is
still hoping for us to find a way.
    We pull up to a house that looks vastly different from the others
I've seen. In America, this would be considered a dump in the middle
of a dump. But here, it is one of the nicer homes you'll find. It is built
from concrete blocks. It's small, maybe twelve by eight feet and the
tin roof is held down by about twenty-five large rocks. Rocks seem
to be the nail of choice in Africa. Ahead, I see the silhouette of large
man. At a distance, he reminds me of an African god.
    "Here's our man," Gordon says. We step out of the car. I grab my
bag from the backseat and sling it over my shoulder.
    Tagoze has come to greet us. He is dressed in Western
clothes--brown pants and an untucked white button-down shirt
with wide green and blue stripes. His arms bulge out of his short
sleeves. He looks like a black Arnold Schwarzenegger. I would not
Scared                                                           151




want to arm-wrestle this guy. He stands with confidence but not
swagger. I like him even before I meet him, which usually isn't my
approach to new people. Whitney said once that everyone in my
general area is a jerk until proven otherwise.
    He and Gordon exchange the traditional Swazi greeting.
    "Sawubona, babay."
    "Yeybo. Sawubona."
    "Tagoze, this is Stuart."
    Tagoze takes my hand and waffle-irons it between his huge mitts.
"Stuart, so nice to meet you. So good to meet you."
    "Thank you, Tagoze. It's great to meet you."
    "Come into my house. I've made some tea." Gordon pulls out a
bag of rolls, some cheese, and cut-up fruit.
    "I brought along a little something as well," Gordon says. He is
a master, I've come to see, at navigating interviews and friendships
here in Swaziland, bringing along just the right things. In this land,
it would be easy to bring too much, but there's a fine line between
appropriate and offense.
    "You can leave the camera bag in the car if you want. Tagoze will
join us at the care point later today. I thought that might be the best
place to take photographs."
    "Sounds good." I leave the bag on my shoulder. Gordon shrugs
and enters Tagoze's house.
    "Make sure you get my good side." Tagoze laughs and turns his
head to display his scars, three lines along his upper cheek bone that
look like they were drawn by an angry cat.
    "Yeah, that's definitely your best side. Were you sparring with a
lion?"
1 5 2 T o m Da v i s




    "I think my entire face would be gone if that were the case. But
you are not so far off."
    "Stu," Gordon turns toward me, "Tagoze got those scratches
when he--"
    Tagoze waves his huge hand through the air. "Let's wait for that
story. You know me, once I get going ..."
    "Yes, I do. That's why I brought this." Gordon produces a micro
recorder from a pocket and sets it on the table. Then he pulls out his
much-used notebook. That's one thing I've learned from hanging out
with writers: The pen is trustier than technology.
    Tagoze's house is sparsely furnished. There is a very old, torn love
seat against one wall, a small table to the right, two wooden desk
chairs adjacent to the coach, and another table made from cardboard
boxes that has been covered by a colorful tablecloth. Two pictures
hang above the couch, one of the queen mother, the other a very
young king with three red feathers sticking up from a small crown.
A chicken walks through the living area and into the kitchen like it
owns the place.
    "Please, sit down. May I offer you some tea?"
    "That would be great, Tagoze, for both of us." Gordon gives me
a snide look and bumps me with his elbow.
    Tagoze walks into the only other room in the house and hollers
out, "Stuart, is this your first time in Africa?"
    "No, I've traveled all over Africa, but never to Swaziland. You
live in a beautiful country."
    "It was once a wonderful place to live. Not only beautiful to the
eye, but to the soul. Now, all has been polluted."
    "I wanted to talk about that," Gordon says. "What changed?"
Scared                                                           153




    "Today, it is nearly impossible for a man to be a man."
    He comes around the corner with three steaming cups of tea and
milk and sugar.
    "Thank you." Gordon clicks on the recorder and picks up his
pen.
    "The African man has been reduced to an animal. Poverty has
reduced him to one who must survive at any cost. The duty of `man
the provider' has been discarded. No longer can our men provide
the things our families and loved ones need. This used to be simple;
now it's nearly impossible. Men need to provide money, but there is
no work. They need to provide food but don't have a job and can't
buy food."
    Tagoze pushes his plate away.
    "Too many men in our community choose the ugly path of
violence. That is what happens when all hope has disappeared.
Nobody cares anymore. Men don't care who gets taken advantage
of or who dies. It doesn't matter how innocent, how young, or how
vulnerable. This is an ugly truth.
    "Things are not soon going to get better, either. Look at all the
young men. Every value we have upheld over the centuries has been
destroyed. The days of father and son working side by side, sons
learning trades and traditions from their fathers--those days are
nearly gone. And so the young men do not have any understanding
of how to treat our women and no model of a healthy family. Instead,
they become directionless and take on the values of hooligans.
    "We must find a way to change this. But how do we do this?
How do we give hope to men who have lost all hope?"
    Tagoze sits back in his chair and crosses his legs. He stares into
1 5 4 T o m Da v i s




some distant, hopeful future, looking more like a sage than a muscle-
bound man who could wrestle lions.
    "I want to tell you a story about a herd of elephants," he
continues. "During a time of great drought, many of the herd died,
including all of the older bull elephants. The bull elephants had been
the leaders--the teachers of the young. Over a period of time, with
no example to show them how to live, the younger bull elephants
started to go crazy. They tormented the rest of the herd, fighting and
injuring the females and offspring. They acted like warriors who had
no war and so decided to simply kill for killing's sake. Well, one day
these wild elephants stormed a village. Many people died in that
village, stomped by elephants or gored by their tusks. My friends,
elephants do not usually act this way. While they have great power,
we have lived in harmony with them for many generations. Their
terror was a tragic, terrible thing.
    "I am certain smart men like you don't need me to tell you how
these young bull elephants are like the young men in our country.
These are the worst of times. Death and disease have broken down
everything we have worked so hard to build. So what keeps the
young bull elephants--the young men who have no direction--from
raping and plundering our homes and families? Nothing. Our hope
for change is hanging on by a hair.
    "This is also my life. Wanting to be a man. I hate this feeling of
powerlessness and helplessness. Before my wife died, she used to say,
`Tagoze, you are God's answer. You can only say yes to His plans for
your life, and you don't always know how He is working. You have
to trust.'"
    "How did your wife die?" I ask, and the moment I ask it, I wish
Scared                                                          155




I hadn't. Tagoze turns to me, looks me in the eyes and speaks with an
intensity that unsettles me.
    "I did not lose her to the plague. I lost her and all my children
in a terrible fire. Everyone called the fire an accident, but I am to
blame."
    "I'm so sorry."
    "The night before, I had been drinking again. I had said many
terrible things to my wife. We fought, and I'm ashamed to say that I
hit her. More than once. On the night of the fire, I was drinking at
the Shabine, the local bar. I saw the flames as I staggered down the
road toward home. People were yelling in the distance, "Simo bucayi,
simo bucayi." "Emergency, emergency!" I arrived just in time to see
my wife tear out of the house, her whole body engulfed in blue and
orange flames."
    He turns away for a moment, but when he returns his gaze to me,
his intensity has been replaced by something else. Resolve, perhaps.
    "At first, I wanted to die. I thought about killing myself. But
Pastor Walter kept checking in on me, praying for me, with me. His
friendship changed my life forever. I gave my life to God, and the
Lord made me into a new person."
    He stands and collects the now-empty teacups.
    "I lost my family to a fire. But now a fire burns in me to do
what I can for my people. Though I am but one man, I will not stop
trying."
    Gordon stands, walks over to Tagoze, and embraces him. This
is no embarrassed man hug that calls for violent patting of the back
and a quick release. It is a true picture of compassion. My throat
tightens up, and I snap a mental photo of this scene.
1 5 6 T o m Da v i s




    Gordon takes the teacups from Tagoze and heads into the other
room. Tagoze sits back down at the small table.
    "Gordon tells me you have met my little friend Adanna," he
says, a broken smile growing on his weathered face.
    "Yes ... just the other day. She had a scar on her arm ..."
    Tagoze reaches up and touches the scars on his own face.
    "I remember when she worked in a neighbor's fields. Seven days
she plowed the ground, planted corn, and carefully watered each
and every tiny mound where the seed was sleeping. She had earned
enough money to buy some food, so she headed to the village store.
I happened to be coming home from a long, tiring day working in
the orchards. There was Adanna, skipping and smiling as if she was
about to be the guest of honor at a birthday party. There was reason
to celebrate indeed.
    "She wasn't in the store but a moment before she burst out with
a green apple in her hand, and a grin on her face as wide as the
Maputo river. I was mesmerized by her joy. I watched as she skipped
proudly down the road, toward home. But something stopped her
in her tracks.
    "Just ahead of her, lying beneath a tree, was a little boy named
Tembe. Everyone knew Tembe. Both his parents had died from
AIDS, and little Tembe was dying of starvation. Many of us gave him
the crumbs from our tables, but it wasn't enough to defeat disease
and sickness.
    "Like a tender, loving doctor, Adanna crouched on one knee and
placed her hand on his forehead. He didn't move. She looked at the
apple in her right hand and back to Tembe. There was no doubt what
she would do. With her mouth still salivating from the thought of
Scared                                                              157




that first bite, she brought the apple low to the ground into Tembe's
line of sight. Slowly, as if waking from a deep sleep, he sat up and
gratefully took the apple from her hand. That, my friend, is the heart
of this dear girl."
    He touches the scars again.
    "You asked about these scars," he says, and his smile fades. "You
do all you can to protect the children. But it is never enough."'
    Gordon returns with fresh cups of tea.
    "I heard a scream coming from the back of the bar as I was
walking by. I did not think twice--I knew what sort of men hung
out there. Bad men, men like I once was. When I saw what was
happening, I exploded in rage. I pulled a demon off of Adanna and
beat him until he died."
    I am stunned, wide-eyed, and my heart has snapped in half. That
poor little girl. I swallow hard.
    "These scars are new, but the evil that caused them is not. And I
will continue to fight against it."
    I take a deep breath. "Lucky for Adanna you happened to be pass-
ing by. I can't imagine what would have happened if you weren't ..."
    "I do not believe in luck, Mr. Stuart."
    "There's more to Adanna's story, Stuart." Gordon turns to me
and places his hand on my shoulder. "Her mother died yesterday."
    A strange blend of ache and anger fills me. I want to hit something
or someone. And I want to crawl into a hole and hide.
    "I wish I could say this kind of thing does not happen here,"
Tagoze says, "but the sad truth is, it happens far too often. We have
become more like animals than men, and even to say this is unfair
to the animals.
1 5 8 T o m Da v i s




    "Light has to be sown in the middle of this miserable darkness.
So I do my part. Whatever I can." Tagoze sees me look at his scars.
"Whatever I must."
    "What will become of Adanna?" I ask.
    "I will help her and her brother and sister as I can. I am certain
Pastor Walter will too. Her physical scars will heal in time, but I do
not know about the scars inside."
    "She is strong, Tagoze. I saw it in her eyes," Gordon says.
    "She is just a little girl, but our God is a very big God," Tagoze
says. "I have to trust that He will take care of her when we cannot."
    Gordon reaches over and clicks off the tape recorder. Our
breakfast meeting is over. As we walk back to the Land Cruiser,
Tagoze stops us to add an addendum to one of his stories.
    "The story of the elephants has an interesting ending," he
begins. "A group of scientists got together and decided there was
only one thing that could be done to help the elephants. They
found three bull elephants from another herd and relocated them
to the out-of-control herd.
    "An amazing thing happened. The seasoned bull elephants
stood together, side by side. They watched as the younger
elephants wreaked havoc. After they saw enough, the older
elephants simultaneously left each other's sides and challenged
the younger bulls in battle. The older elephants drove the younger
into the ground with brute force and superior skill. They pinned
them there, refusing to let them move. This went on for sixteen
hours.
    "After that time, they let the rebels up. The younger elephants
cowered at the sides of the older, stronger bulls. And that was it. They
Scared                                                          159




never exhibited the crazy, carousing, out-of-control behavior again.
Peace and order had been restored to the herd.
    "This, too, is my prayer for our people. That the older elephants
would rise up and do what is good, what is moral, what is African.
But where are those men?
    "I, at least, will be one."
                     Chapter Sixteen

I look out the side mirror and see Tagoze's massive figure becoming
a speck as we drive down the main road. In Swaziland, there are only
two main roads. One runs north to south, the other east to west.
They are new, smooth roads not unlike any well-traveled highway in
America. But once you turn off from the main roads, you're in for an
entirely different experience.
    The sound of shredding metal raking across the surface of the
asphalt as we turn off the main road is a vivid reminder that this is
not America. One second you're cruising at sixty miles per hour, and
the next your vehicle is crawling like a moon rover over millions of
rocks and boulders as you dodge potholes as big as your vehicle. No
wonder nobody drives at night around here.
    No matter where you go in this country, if you are white,
people will notice you. They stop whatever they're doing, smile
like they're posing for a glamour shot, then wave enthusiastically in
your direction. Perhaps they think we are bringing food, medicine,
clothes. They know we are here because we choose to be. We could
be doing a thousand other things in a thousand other places. Instead,
here we are, the pale ghosts of hope.
    There are scattered cornfields on the slopes of these hills, but
they are mostly an exercise in frustration. There has been too little

                                 160
Scared                                                             161




rain. The corn comes up but can't produce a viable crop. Futile fields
are abandoned, left alone to be attacked by disease and parasites.
    I look at Gordon, who's been uncharacteristically quiet.
    "Where are we headed?"
    "Another care point."
    "Could we stop by Walter's place instead? I'd like to get some
more pictures of Walter, and ..."
    "And?"
    "I also want to see how Adanna is doing."
    Gordon turns and raises his eyebrows.
    "Careful, Stuart. You're about to break the golden rule here in
Africa."
    "Golden rule? What, loving my neighbor?"
    "No, I'm talking about focusing too much on one particular
child instead of the overall situation--the crisis in this country. Don't
get sucked in. Remember, you're a journalist."
    "A journalist. Yeah. I am certainly that."
    But is that all I am? "I don't know how you do it, Gordon. How
you can live here among all the poverty and desperation without going
crazy. Everywhere I turn, there's another sad story. Poverty is like a
stray, starving dog you fed once and now follows you everywhere."
    "Hey!" He grabs his notebook and throws it at me. The pen
drops onto the floor and rolls under my feet. "Write that down, what
you just said about poverty and a starving dog."
    I struggle to write as the car jerks and bounces.
    "I've lived here for some time," Gordon says, "trying to wrap my
brain around this situation and find a way to help. I'm not saying there
isn't value in helping an individual child. Of course that's important.
1 6 2 T o m Da v i s




It's critically important. My point is that you have to juggle two
realities--the big picture and the small one. If you lose sight of the
big one, you might just miss opportunities to help in small ways."
    I think about this, and I hear the words "Feed my sheep."
    "What is it about this place, Gordon? It twists you all up inside
and messes with your head."
    "And your heart."
    "Yeah, that, too."
    "In this place, Stu, God has a way of bringing people down to
the essence of who they are."
    I wonder about the people who live here. What is their essence?
    The homesteads along this road are peppered across the hills
like ships scattered across the sea. It is a far cry from the crowded
cityscape of New York or even the cut-and-paste communities of
American suburbia. If the homes were huge, it might remind me a
little of the ranches of Montana. But these homes are sticks and rocks
and mud. And there are no SUVs parked along snaking driveways.
    "Gordon, I'd like to pull over at the next store."
    "Stores are hard to come by around here."
    "How far?"
    "At least an hour. Forget your hairspray or something?"
    "Very funny. No, I want to get some things to hand out to the
kids. It's the least I can do."
    "Stuart, that's very noble of you. But we've got to stay on course
here. I do still need to get paid for this project, and so do you."
    The car makes a sudden swing around. A few hundred yards
later, Gordon turns down a road I never would have known existed.
    "But then again, maybe that is just what we need to do after all."
Scared                                                               163




The store is not at all like your local Safeway. It's tiny with four or
five isles. As soon as I step inside, I am accosted by the pungent smell
of unrefrigerated meat. Flies are hovering around lamb, beef, and
chicken, landing now and then to take a few bites.
    Gordon walks ahead of me.
    "The sugar cane workers shop here. They're mostly white men in
management jobs. They're the ones with the coin. The blacks could
hardly afford to buy anything here with the slave wage they receive
for hacking through cane twelve hours a day."
    Perusing the shelves, I quickly realize I don't have the faintest idea
what half of this stuff is: gravy powders, curry, piri-piri oil, biltong--a
meat of some kind--mielie-meal, and huge bags of beans and rice.
    The packaging looks like most American products ... from ten
years ago. This stuff has been sitting around for ages. I pick up a package
in search of an expiration date. Three years beyond "sell by" date.
    "Gordon, what is this stuff?"
    "This must look like Chinese to you."
    I read the label out loud. "`Biltong.' Even sounds a little like
Chinese. What is it?"
    "They're strips of sun-dried, spiced meat. Just like your beef jerky."
    "Beef jerky can stay good for years. I think I should get some."
    "I remember the first time a came into a shop like this. My
daughter pulled things down from the shelves as fast as she could and
piled them into my wife's basket. I was so overwhelmed by the whole
situation, I just let her go. You can't believe how much we spent that
day!" He laughs, but I can see the sadness on his face. "Now, I'm a
pro. Let me help you out."
    Without missing a beat, Gordon throws a myriad of strange
1 6 4 T o m Da v i s




boxes in the cart. I recognize the basics, corn, rice, and tea, but other
than that, I have no idea what the stuff is.
    Four staff huddle together in the corner by the cash register,
watching us with great amusement. They laugh and point, covering
their mouths sheepishly. If that happened in my local Safeway I'd
definitely complain to the manager.
    "Why are those clerks gawking at us?"
    "Well, to you, this may seem like a typical shopping day, but
here, nobody shops like this."
    "Because they don't have money?"
    A white couple walks by, staring at our cart without inhibition.
They have three things in their hands and it looks like they're done
shopping.
    "In part because of that, but also because of culture. In Africa
you only live for the day. No one would buy this quantity of food
unless they were having a huge party."
    "I guess that makes sense. But it's hard to fathom something as
basic as food being a luxury."
    "T.I.A., my friend."
    "What?"
    "T.I.A.: This is Africa."
    "Got it."
    We place the items on the counter. There's a single bag of wet wipes
next to a first-aid kit, so I swipe them both. The clerks huddle together
with big smiles on their faces and nods of excitement. One starts to ring
us up, and the others watch with great interest, happy as larks.
    "Okay, what's the damage? I hope I have enough cash; this looks
like a fortune."
Scared                                                           165




    The cashier's voice breaks off in accented English, "Seven
hundred and ten rand."
    Turning to Gordon I ask, "How much is that?"
    "Let's see. One hundred and one dollars."
    "That's it? For this much food! I'd spend this much on dinner
with a decent bottle of wine."
    "You and a million other Westerners."
    "Okay, you can pull the knife out of my chest now."
    Moments later we are outside, packing the food in the Land
Cruiser. Hoisting fifty-kilogram bags of food over my shoulder
isn't something I've done very often, but I can imagine it would
have been easier a few years ago. When I was not so out of shape.
    "Ow!" My hand grabs hold of my lower back. That didn't feel
so good.
    "You all right, old man?"
    "Old man? You're twice my age."
    "You couldn't tell by the way you lift those bags."


As the dust spits behind the tires, we finally round the corner
toward the care point--Pastor Walter's care point. My heart starts
to beat a little faster, and my palms sweat.
    The place looks exactly like we left it yesterday. The same
children sit under the trees. The same widows huddle next to the
rotting pyramid of wood wondering when they will next cook a
meal. A spirit of despair loiters here like an unwanted guest.
    Our arrival changes everything. People jump up as if jarred by
electricity. They head toward us, some hobbling, others jogging.
The first bag of food pokes its head out of the jeep like a man
1 6 6 T o m Da v i s




emerging from beneath the water, and the whole community
comes to life.
    Women clap, run to us, and lift their hands to heaven crying,
"Praise God, thank God!" In a nanosecond, children bear in on us like
heat-seeking missiles and shout, "Please, mister. Me, mister, please!"
    The gratitude gushing out of their souls is like a sudden rainstorm
in the midst of a draught. And we bring so little.
    The gogos, busy as a swarm of bees, arrange wood and light a fire.
They've been waiting for days, so they're not going to waste a second.
    Every face is filled with beauty and the anticipation of a good
meal. But I don't see the face I'm looking for. Adanna is nowhere to
be found.
    "Gordon, could you ask someone to take me to Adanna's place?
I don't see her anywhere."
    "Sure. Eshe, run with Stuart and find Adanna would you?"
    A lovely college-aged girl with short hair and a glowing face
looks our direction. She's wearing a T-shirt that says "Children's
HopeChest."
    "No problem, Gordon. Mr. Daniels, are you ready?"
    How does she know who I am?
    "Let me just gather what I want to give her from the car." I grab
what I can and it really doesn't seem like much, but I suspect it's
enough food to last her family a week.
    "Do I need to be on the lookout for snakes, Eshe?" I hate snakes.
    "Not in the winter. Now if it was summer, you would be in big
trouble!"
    "Big trouble?"
    "Yes. You're really afraid of snakes aren't you?"
Scared                                                             167




    "You have no idea."
    "Last year, the men killed a nine-foot black mamba."
    "Where?"
    "Right over there by the hut. You look so surprised. You should
not be--after all, they were here first."
    She smiles at me, clearly pleased with herself for making me
squirm. But it is a sweet smile. I think she is just teasing me.
    As we walk, I begin to notice things I hadn't the other day. There
is trash littered across the dirt paths--everything from tin cans to
scattered animal bones. Cacti grow like they're on steroids along
with something I think must be called a "devilbush." This bush is
more prominent than weeds and far more intimidating. Hooked
thorns hang by the hundreds off its branches, just waiting for careless
passersby to become entangled ... and probably bleed to death.
    Gordon told me this area is known as "the valley of a thousand
hills," and I see why. When we crest the top of a hill, you can see
hundreds more kaleidoscoping in every direction.
    "An interesting landscape you have here, Eshe."
    "You think so? Why do you say that?"
    "There are so many beautiful things about it on one hand and
on the other ..."
    "So many ugly things?"
    "Hmm ... maybe not ugly. Contradictory."
    "What does that mean?"
    "Like beauty and ashes or light and dark. There's so many
incredible things about your country and so many terrible things."
    Soon, we arrive at Adanna's. I recognize the two tree limbs
standing guard to the open door.
1 6 8 T o m Da v i s




    I knock on the broken door that rests up against the house. No
answer.
    "Hello?" Eshe says. "Adanna?"
    She pushes the door aside and I follow.
    It's dark. The smell of burnt wood hits me in the face. I notice
there's no hole to ventilate the place. The ceiling is pitch black from
soot. There are smoldering ashes in the middle of the room.
    "Adanna?"
    "Hello? Anyone here?"
    There's the faint sound of sniffling. My eyes quickly adjust to the
darkness, and I spot a child curled up in the fetal position.
    "Adanna?" Precious and Abu are sitting on the opposite side of the
room, huddled together. They're a mess. What has happened here?
    Without a second thought, I gather her in my arms.
    "Are you okay?" I look at her legs, "You're bleeding! Eshe, help!"
    Adanna is not comforted by my presence. A look of fear rests in
her eyes. I take a quick inventory of the room and wonder if there
has been a fight. A broken cup and some things I don't recognize
are scattered across the floor. Then I realize ... the room is almost
completely empty. Can a family really have nothing?
    Eshe is by my side, stroking Adanna's hair and speaking soothing
words to her in S'swati.
    "Ask her what happened."
    "I have, but she will not say. I can tell you one thing though."
    "What's that?"
    "Somebody very bad did this to her."
                   Chapter Seventeen

She's been beaten pretty badly. She is shivering from head to toe like
someone just pulled her out of a frozen lake. There are bruises on her
skinny arms and one on her foot. The goose egg over her left eye is
swollen and red, and her lips are crusted with blood. My stomach
tightens when I remember what Tagoze told me this morning.
    She won't utter a word. From the looks of her body and torn
clothes, I have some idea of what took place. My brain takes orbit in
a new planetary sphere; one I cannot fathom. I am shaking my head
back and forth over and over as I look at this child, her brother and
sister huddled in the corner, in this barren hut. Where is God in this?
    "Eshe, what do you do in a place like this to get help? Do you call
the police?" As the words leave my mouth, I already know the answer.
    "The police don't care."
    I pick up the little boy, who has started to cry, and walk outside
the door. Precious follows behind.
    She says something in S'swati, and I don't understand her, but I
hear Adanna's name.
    I am surprised when Abu puts his head on my shoulder. I pat his
back and sit down in front of their hut. The girl, who I'm guessing is
about four, sits next to me. She is dressed in a dirty pink skirt and red
shirt. She smoothes out her skirt like a lady, something she no doubt

                                 169
1 7 0 T o m Da v i s




saw her mother do many times. Her tiny nails are dirty. Still, she is
beautiful, like her sister.
    "What is your name?" I say to her. She just looks at me, so I
point to myself and say, "Stuart." Then I point behind me into the
house and say, "Adanna." Then I repeat the exercise.
    A big smile crosses her face. She points to me and says, "Duard,"
then inside and says, "Adanna." Then she proudly points to herself,
"Precious."
    "What a beautiful name." Somehow, she understands and sits a
little taller. Then she points to her brother and says, "Abu." I'm not
sure if that's his name, or if it means baby. I wish I could sweep them
all away.
    I look at the dirt path leading to this home, isolated and totally
unprotected. There's no alarm system to set, no way to even bolt
and lock the door. I can picture the perpetrator warning Adanna
to stay quiet or he will hurt her more next time. There is no justice
here. Only fear. I am convinced this is the very root of wickedness.
Precious leans into me, quiet as a mouse. Birds chirp in the distance.
The baby sighs. And I am suffocated with my inability to help these
children.
    After a few minutes--though time has no measure in this surreal
place--Abu has fallen asleep. I stand carefully and walk back inside.
His sister follows and points to a mat, and I lay him down. My heart
is breaking.
    Eshe is sitting next to Adanna, her hand gently placed on
Adanna's back. Eshe knows how to handle this.
    I bend down beside her. Precious follows me like a shadow.
"Adanna, I'm so sorry. I will do what I can to help you."
Scared                                                                171




    She looks up at me with big brown eyes that reveal more pain
and loss than I've ever known but says nothing.
    "I know you're scared. I will protect you." I feel the anger rising
up. I don't feel as patient as Eshe. "Tell us who did this to you."
    Silence.
    "She's too scared, Stuart. And you're just a stranger. There's no
way she'll tell us who's responsible. It could even be a relative."
    A relative? God forbid.
    Her clothes are badly ripped. I look for something she can put
on but find nothing. I take off my shirt and offer it to her. Precious
covers her mouth with two hands and laughs at the sight of my bare
white torso and hairy chest.
    Adanna shakes her head. She won't take the shirt.
    "Eshe, will you please ask her to put this on?"
    Surprisingly, Adanna lets her.
    "Is there anything we can do to help you?"
    Nothing.
    "Can we take you to someone? Is there somewhere you want
to go?"
    Still nothing. I stand and brush the dirt from my pants. It
won't brush off because it is not only dirt but also blood. Adanna's
blood.
    I pick up the first-aid kit and open it. The cold pack inside snaps
in my hand, and Adanna is startled.
    "I'm sorry. This is a cold pack for your head. It may not feel
good at first, but you need to let Eshe hold it so the swelling will go
down." Eshe takes it and slowly works it onto her head like an expert.
Adanna doesn't move.
1 7 2 T o m Da v i s




     "Precious, would you help me?" Eshe repeats the phrase in
S'swati so Precious can understand.
     Precious smiles. "I know what you say." Clever girl. Apparently,
she knows some English.
     I spot a small ramshackle cabinet on the opposite side of the room.
It creaks as I open it. The room instantly fills with dancing specks of
dust reflecting in the light. This obviously hasn't been used in quite
some time. I use one of the wipes to clean the inside of the cabinet.
When I finish, it is almost completely black from dirt and soot. I offer
another wipe to Precious. She starts to clean alongside me.
     "No, honey. For your face and hands." She looks confused, so I
bend down and wipe her hands. Then I take another and gently wipe
her face. She stays very still.
     I empty the bags of food onto the floor and hand them to
Precious to put away. Soup. Tea. Sugar. Canned meat. Oranges. She
organizes them neatly inside the cupboard, except for one orange,
which she hides behind her back.
     "You don't have to hide it--it's for you. Do you want me to peel
it?" She looks up at me and nods. As I take off the skin, she grabs the
peel from my hand and stuffs it in her mouth.
     "No, no, wait." She laughs and keeps chewing. I give her the
orange in quarters, and she eats it.
     Eshe continues to talk to Adanna, trying to soothe her, and
begins to dab at her cuts with the little antiseptic pads from the
first-aid kit.
     At last she is looking up at us. I can tell she is thankful, but that
thankfulness is quickly pushed aside by shock, grief, and a soul-deep
devastation.
Scared                                                              173




    A rage begins to boil in me. Real rage, rage that could kill. There
will be a white-hot place in hell for the worthless pigs who do things
like this.
    "Eshe, would you be willing to stay here while I go find Walter?"
I hate to leave her here, but I can't think of what else to do. "I'll come
right back with him or my friend Gordon."
    "I go with you," Precious says and steps next to me like a little
soldier.
    I hear a scratchy, weak voice say, "No. Precious, you stay here
with me."
    It's Adanna's voice.


Closing in on the care point, I spot Gordon playing soccer with some
of the kids. He stops when he sees me.
    "Stuart, what is it? Where is your shirt?" His face twists with
concern.
    "It's Adanna, Gordon. She's been hurt. Bad. We need to get
Walter."
    Pastor Walter is sitting on concrete steps outside of the church.
He looks intense. I can tell he's teaching a young woman about
something important, maybe helping her deal with a husband who
has ten other wives and could be bringing the AIDS virus to her bed,
or about malnutrition, or about how to get rid of the worms in her
belly she's picked up from drinking contaminated water.
    I rush up, Gordon following, and interrupt their teaching time.
He and the woman look at me, and the woman covers her mouth.
She hides a smile behind her hand. I had forgotten for a moment
that I was shirtless.
1 7 4 T o m Da v i s




    "Pastor Walter--we need your help." I am out of breath, realizing
for the second time today that I have a long way to go to get back
into shape.
    "Yes, my brother. What is it?"
    "Could I talk to you in private?"
    "Sister, give me just one moment, would you?"
    We walk inside and to the back of the room.
    "Stuart, where is your shirt?"
    "I gave it to Adanna. Eshe and I just went to visit her--to take
her some food. But when we got there ..."
    He grabs the back of his head with his right hand. "Is she okay?"
    "I don't know."
    "What happened?"
    "She wouldn't talk. It looked like someone broke in and stole
things from the house. It's been picked clean. And Walter ... Adanna
is a mess--beaten up badly. Bleeding in places." Gordon cranes his
neck to listen in.
    Walter is shaking his head. "Can things get any worse for that
poor child?"
    "I think they are worse," I say, unsure what words to use.
"Walter ... her clothes were shredded."
    "Oh, dear God in heaven. Not again."
    "Eshe is with her now. I'm afraid for them to be alone. What if
the monster who did this comes back?"
    "Run back to her house right away. Gordon, you go too. Then
send Eshe back. I will come as quickly as I can."
    "Do we need anything, Stuart?" Gordon grabs his backpack
from the Land Cruiser.
Scared                                                            175




    I grab an extra shirt from my bag and struggle into it as we jog
toward Adanna's house.
    "No, I already brought her food--and for some reason had the
first-aid kit with me too. It's already being put to use."
    We start down the narrow dirt path, shoulder to shoulder.
    "I would call that providential, Stuart."
    "Providence. Yeah, let's talk about the providence of being
raped, Gordon. What about that providence? I can't imagine
how God can sit up in the heavens, watch this happen, and do
nothing. Where's the rain of fire and brimstone to defeat the
evil?"
    "God is grieved."
    "Then why won't He act?"
    Gordon sighs loudly.
    "That is a tricky question, one I've thought about a lot."
    "Of course, Gordon. I'm sorry ... I wasn't thinking ..."
    "No, it's good to wrestle with these questions. There was a time
when I nearly lost my faith over them--but now ... now I am content
to rest in the mystery of it all."
    "Content? Really? But it's all so senseless--you, a good man,
losing your family. Adanna ... I can't even say it. Why would anyone
do that to a little girl ... she's just a little girl, Gordon!"
    "Oh, I am not content with the evil--I hate the evil. And I will
do anything I can to fight it. But the mystery--how God is working
in all this ... that I have learned to trust."
    Three kids pass us holding hands, heading to the care point. The
youngest can't be older than two, and the oldest only around five.
They are barefoot and caked in dirt.
1 7 6 T o m Da v i s




    "After seeing all this ugliness ... I just don't know if I can trust
in anything, Gordon."
    "It's taken me years to come to this, but here is what I've
concluded: The utter depravity of these terrible acts, the sheer poverty
and sickness, death and sadness--these things can weigh down your
soul and render it weak and useless, or they can stir your soul to life
in a way that changes you. And other people as a result.
    "I believe this is God's way. His heart is broken over what happened
to Adanna, this I know. But look at your feet, Stuart, you are racing to
her aid. You are God's feet. You are showing kindness. You are God's
hands. You have fed her and her family. You are feeding His sheep."
    These familiar words punch my gut and stir my soul. The growing
wind blows tears from my face onto the scorched earth. The wind is
carrying something else, a sound.
    "Gordon, do you hear that?"
    "Yes. It's voices. Screaming."
    We both start running. I race as if a lion is chasing me. Up ahead
is the hut, the door wide open. A stuffed white burlap sack is resting
against the side of the house. The red label from a package of rice
pokes out through the opening.
    Eshe is screaming in S'swati. I can only make out the word "No."
Inside, a large man is pushing Eshe up against the wall. He is hitting
her and ripping at her clothes.
    My eye catches a form moving on the other side of the room.
Adanna is stumbling across the room, a tin cup in her hand up over
her head. She sees me, our eyes catch, and she freezes. Fresh blood
flows from her nose and lip. A searing flash of red rips through my
cortex, and I lunge forward.
Scared                                                             177




    I grab the beast from behind. He's got to be twice my size, but I
pull him to the floor. My fists pound with a fury I've never known.
Each blast rings true. Flesh and bone ripping and crack beneath my
fists. I can't stop myself. He tries to escape, but trips over the burlap
bag. I leap onto him again and grab his neck. I want to squeeze the life
out of him. A hand grabs the back of my shirt and tugs me away.
    "Stuart, stop. You're going to kill him."
    "I don't care."
    "There are laws in this country, and they won't work in your
favor. You've made him pay a price. Now leave it alone."
    I look at the blood pouring from his nose and mouth. The right
side of his face is badly swollen. I never imagined I would ever be
angry enough to want to kill a man.
    Gordon says something in S'swati. The man hoists himself up.
He gives me a piercing stare--a Charles Manson stare. I feel a power
deep inside me, and I do not look away. Gordon speaks to him again,
and the man shouts something, then turns and shuffles away.
    "What did he say?"
    "It's not worth repeating."
    "What did you say to him?"
    "I told him, `God sees what you've done, you snake. You will not
go unpunished.'" He pauses. "Then I told him to get out of here and
never come back."
    My mind starts to clear. We step into the house.
    "Eshe, are you okay?"
    She is crying and has her arms around Adanna, who is also
sobbing.
    "Adanna. Are you okay?"
1 7 8 T o m Da v i s




    Eshe looks at me. She has scratches on her face, but otherwise
seems unharmed.
    "He meant to steal everything you brought," she says. "He was
so angry and started to beat Adanna again. I tried to stop him, but
I could not."
    Adanna's sobs become a low, guttural moan. How much does
one girl have to suffer?
    "Where are Precious and Abu? Do you see the little ones any-
where, Gordon?"
    "He told them to run away." Adanna sobs louder.
    "I'll find them," Gordon says. He steps out of the hut and begins
calling their names.
    I put my hand on Adanna's shoulder. "I will do all I can to make
sure that man will never hurt you again." My voice is quiet. I can
offer more than a tenuous hope.
    Suddenly, I hear the bang of the door and a thud. Eshe yells
something in S'swati.
    Before I can turn around, hot burning fire is lodged in my
back. I reach behind myself and feel something hot and wet. Blood.
Everything begins to cloud over.
    The evil man scrambles out of the hut, grabs the white bag, and
disappears. Gordon comes running moments later.
    "Gordon, I think I've been stabbed."
                      Chapter Eighteen

God only knows where that knife has been. The wound on my back
pulsates in waves.
    Gordon is by my side. "Stuart, oh man, you're bleeding really
bad."
    Eshe is holding Abu. Precious is standing next to her, a look of
horror on her face. Adanna springs back to life and kneels next to me
like an angel in prayer.
    Gordon reaches over and turns my head so he can look me in the
eyes. I am having trouble focusing.
    "I'm going to peel up your shirt so I can get a better look," he
says. I wince as he carefully rolls up the back of my T-shirt.
    "He got you good. It looks deep."
    My head is a cantaloupe, and I can barely hold it up.
    "Eshe, run back to the care point. Tell Walter to drive up here
with my car as fast as he can. Hurry!" He throws her the keys, she
sets down Abu, and she's gone. Gordon walks around the hut,
looking for something. He mutters, "That devil must have taken
the first-aid kit."
    I hear ripping sounds. Gordon ties two ends of his shirt together.
"I'm going to wrap this around your torso, Stuart. Adanna, put your
hand on it and press down. We have to stop the bleeding."

                                 179
1 8 0 T o m Da v i s




    She puts her hand on my back. I scream in pain. It is a sound I
have never heard escape my own lips.
    Precious comes over and tries to help, but Adanna shakes her
head and motions for her to back away. Precious sits down right in
front of me, a pouty, sympathetic look on her face. I muster a smile
that quickly morphs into a wince. Scooting closer to me, she eyes her
sister to measure her response. When she gets none, leans against me,
offering her closeness as a hug.
    "Who was that man?" Gordon asks.
    Adanna does not respond.
    "Please, Adanna, we must know. He has done very bad things."
    Precious answers instead.
    "Uncle Malako."
    "Your uncle?"
    "He's my aunt's husband and nothing more." I turn at the sound
of Adanna's scratchy, low voice. She is talking through clenched teeth.
"I am sorry for what he did to you," she says to me.
    "I am sorry for what he did to you, for everything." My body
starts to slump over. The last thing I remember before blacking out is
seeing Walter standing in the doorway.


The doctors shout in English. This is good.
    "He's lost a lot of blood!" I barely make out what looks like the
face of a young African doctor. He's wearing a white coat with a
stethoscope around his neck. Like any doc you'd see in a movie.
    Lights flash and monitors beep like an untrained handbell choir.
The gurney I'm lying on flies down the hall. We pass people who are
nothing more than blurs and swirls to my semiconscious brain. I am
Scared                                                             181




holding tight to my orange pack, which has somehow made it onto
this crazy train.
    This looks nothing like an American hospital. People are stacked
everywhere, like rows of hot-dog buns; on the floors, two to a bed,
and under the beds. I come to a rest in a room that is surprisingly
empty. I can't tell if it's an operating room ... or a morgue.
    The walls are made from gray cinder blocks and match the clammy
metal fixtures perfectly. I expect to see an IV line in my arm, but there
is none. A black cat darts through the hall. Tremors run up and down
my spine. If blood loss doesn't kill me, surely a staph infection will.
    I'm not ready to die.
    Where is Gordon?
    "Hello, Mr. Daniels, I'm Dr. Smith."
    I lift my hand to shake his and pain jets through my back.
    "Just try to stay still."
    "You don't sound African. Neither does your name." My words
drip slowly from my mouth as if through molasses.
    "Nope. I'm American. Moved here ten years ago to help establish
this hospital."
    "You came here on purpose?"
    He laughs.
    "Yes, on purpose." He is holding up an X-ray, studying it against
the flickering fluorescent lights. "I have good news for you. We were
worried that the knife had punctured one of your kidneys. I'm happy
to tell you that's not the case. It was a near miss."
    "Thank God."
    "Another few millimeters to the left and it would have been a
different story."
1 8 2 T o m Da v i s




    Gordon appears behind the doctor. He is wearing a look of
concern.
    "Is he okay, Doc?"
    I see another figure trailing behind him. Adanna.
    "Eshe and Walter took the little ones for the night, but we
decided Adanna could use a bit of attention at the hospital too."
    "Hello again." I must sound delirious. Perhaps I am.
    The doctor walks around the gurney and checks my vitals. He
smiles at Adanna.
    "I see you have good friends looking out for you," he says to
me. "We are concerned about infection setting in so we're going to
have you on some strong antibiotics. Other than that, you should
be fine."
    "Thanks, Doc."
    "We'll get you some fresh blood and finish sewing you up and
then you can be on your way. Looks like you'll need about twenty
stitches."
    "You mean I haven't been stitched up yet?"
    "Not yet. Don't worry. We've got a pressure bandage holding you
together for the moment."
    "Okay."
    He leaves for more than a few minutes, during which I fade in
and out of consciousness. Every time my eyes open, I see Adanna
standing beside Gordon. And every time she sees me looking at her,
she brings a smile to her face.
    Dr. Smith comes back, and I feel every stitch as it goes in,
muted only slightly by local anesthetics. When he is finished, I half
expect him to slap me on the back and say, "All done!" Instead, he
Scared                                                         183




strips off his rubber gloves and walks around so he can look me in
the eye.
    "Nineteen," he says.
    "Nineteen?"
    "Stitches. That's how many it took. No need for a twentieth,
even if it would have made me particularly pleased to have guessed
exactly right."
    I think he is being funny so I smile.
    "Now, be sure you keep your stitches and the wound clean at
all times. And don't go swimming for a while. That would be a very
bad idea."
    "Got it. No swimming."
    "One more thing."
    "Yes?"
    "Please try to stay away from crazies wielding knives."
    "Yeah. That's my plan."
    "We'll need to see you back here in a few days, to check the
wound."
    "Of course."
    "Now, young lady," he turns to Adanna. "Do you think you
could come with me to get Mr. Daniels' medicine?"
    He looks at Gordon, "Is this okay with you?"
    "Certainly, if it's okay with Adanna."
    "It's fine," she says, and walks with the doctor. I can hear him
saying, "Maybe we can find some medicine for you, too."
    "Tomorrow, we must go and file a police report," I say.
    "That would be like throwing a complaint into a hurricane."
    "Why?"
1 8 4 T o m Da v i s




    He lowers his voice. "Well, first they won't believe that he raped
the girl. In this country it's always the adult's word over the child's.
They'd never believe her in a thousand years."
    "So there's nothing that can be done?"
    "Nothing. And you wonder why there's an AIDS problem?"
    "Not anymore, I don't. But what about the fact that he stabbed
me?"
    "It's his word against yours. He'll say it was self-defense because
you were beating the crap out of him. You may get in more trouble
than he would. At the very least, it would waste an entire day."
    "There is no justice in this country."
    A U2 song emanates from my backpack. "Gordon, can you fish
that out of my pack?" He hands me my suddenly functioning cell
phone.
    "Hello?"
    "It's Whitney. Good morning."
    "Uh, yeah, good morning. It's morning here? Or there?"
    "Stuart, you sound terrible. What's wrong?"
    "Nothing. Well, not much. What makes you think something's
wrong?"
    "Where are you? I hear a lot of noise in the background. What's
that beeping?"
    "Well, it's a long story, Whit. But it's nothing to worry about."
Gordon turns his back to me, shaking his head.
    "Would you just tell me, please?"
    "I'm at the hospital. I was stabbed. But I'm okay now."
                   Chapter Nineteen

"This isn't funny, Stuart. Are you being serious, or is this one of your
badly timed jokes?"
    "I wish it were a joke. Wait, no, I don't really mean that. I
wouldn't joke about things like this ... I ..."
    "Just tell me what happened."
    "Well ... I was visiting the home of this young girl--her name
is Adanna--anyway, she has had it really rough because her mother
just died from AIDS and Adanna had been attacked once by an evil
man and just before I got to her house--I was bringing her food
and stuff--she had been attacked again, but this time by her uncle
so when he came back later and I walked in on him, I beat him up
real good and told him never to come back but then later he did and
snuck up behind me and stabbed me ..."
    "Oh, is that all?"
    "Yeah, that pretty much covers it."
    "Stuart ..."
    "Wait, I forgot to mention that Adanna is, like maybe twelve
years old and that she has two younger siblings who were there
too."
    "Those poor children. Are they okay? And are you really okay?"
    "I'm about as okay as a man can be with a stab wound in his

                                 185
1 8 6 T o m Da v i s




back. Adanna ... she's been through a lot, but I think she's going to
be okay, too. And the other two are fine."
    I can hear a sigh that is both relief and resignation. "You can
be such an idiot sometimes, Stuart." She's not angry. She knows me
better than I know myself. "I was all ready to yell at you for hanging
up on me the other night, but how can I possibly be angry at someone
who risks his life to save helpless children?"
    Children. Whitney.
    "You're going to have a baby!"
    "Why, yes we are. Glad you finally caught on."
    "Babe ... Whitney, I am so sorry. I dropped the phone and
couldn't get it to work again. The Internet was down and all the
phones went out and I have no idea why the cell phone is suddenly
working now but I'm so glad it is...."
    "Whoa ... slow down. It's okay, Stuart. Relax."
    "I think the pain medication is starting to kick in because I'm
starting to feel a little loopy."
    "Starting to?" She laughs, and it makes me smile. "We don't have
to talk now. It can wait. I'm just glad you're okay ... and that you
didn't hang up on me. Right now you just need to heal."
    In more ways than one. But for the first time in a long time, I
actually think it might just be possible.
    "Is there a doctor or nurse nearby?"
    "Um ... yeah. I think the doctor is just outside. He was here a
minute ago...."
    "Let me talk to him."
    "Okay."
    "And, Stuart ..."
Scared                                                             187




    "Yes?"
    "I love you."
    Despite the drugs, or perhaps because of them, I don't hesitate.
"I love you too."
    Gordon has already gone after Dr. Smith. He takes the phone
and tells Whitney about my injury and the prognosis for recovery.
    "Of course, Mrs. Daniels. We will indeed. Do you need to talk
to your husband again?" He laughs. "Okay, I'll tell him."
    Dr. Smith closes the phone and hands it to me.
    "What did she say?"
    "She said, and this is a bit of a paraphrase, `You tell him not to do
anything stupid again or I'll kick him in the ... gluteus maximus.'"
    "She didn't say `gluteus maximus,' did she?"
    "No."
    He walks back out into the hallway. I zone out for what seems
like minutes but might have been much more. When I look up,
Adanna is talking with Dr. Smith again. She's showing him a small
book with what looks like a woman's face on it.
    My heart hurts when I see Adanna's face, especially when she
smiles. I want to help her, to make her life better. But what can I do?
    Gordon grabs my backpack.
    "The doctor said if you're feeling up to it, we can go. Actually, he
said we have to go. They need the bed."
    Gordon helps me sit up. The pain in my back is numbed, but I
still feel it. My head spins, but I am determined to stand.
    "Where are we headed?"
    "We need to take Adanna to Walter's place. Then we'll get you to
the hotel." We walk slowly into the hallway.
1 8 8 T o m Da v i s




    "This is one special young lady here," the doctor says. He looks
in Adanna's direction, and she puts her head down.
    "Yes, I know."


Gordon is at the wheel, and a quiet Adanna sits in the back, looking
out the window. The afternoon sky is unusually dark. Thick clouds
have interrupted the sun without announcement or apology. There's
a crack of thunder that makes us all jump, and the sky opens. We are
not introduced gently to this storm. There is no drizzle or light rain.
There is only a sudden downpour. Immediately, torrents flash down
across our path.
    "I've never seen rain like this," I yell to Gordon, who's craning
his neck forward, trying to see. I look back at Adanna. She continues
to stare out the window.
    The sound of the rain pelting the car is deafening, like rocks on
a tin roof.
    I've been through a few Texas thunderstorms, potato wagons
and all, but this is different. The rain is falling with such force, a fog
envelops the car in minutes, and we can't see five feet in front of us.
    Gordon yells, "We're going have to pull over until this lets up. I
can't see a thing."
    We pull over, but not far, fearing we might slip down the edge
of the road into a gully. Within minutes, small rivers of runoff have
formed in the streets. Rivers.
    "This is unbelievable. It's never rained this hard since I've lived
here. I don't trust this storm." Gordon fumbles with the radio dial.
    The second it clicks on, there are several raps with loud,
consecutive beeps.
Scared                                                              189




    "Swazi radio AM 1060. This is a severe-weather alert. A
flash-flood warning has been issued for the city of Manzini and
surrounding areas through tomorrow morning. This storm will
hit particularly hard in the area of Matsapha. There will be severe
flooding in Matsapha and all areas around Manzini. Take to higher
ground immediately to avoid this potential threat. Repeat, flee to
higher ground immediately."
    Adanna raises her voice to a level of alarm. "Matsapha? That's
where my brother and sister are. We have to go find them."
    She starts coughing. She's been coughing a lot today.
    Gordon speaks firmly. "We can't go anywhere right now."
    "But there's no choice, Mr. Gordon. Abu and Precious could
drown. Please, we have to do something."
    "We'll go, just as soon as this lets up."
    "No, I'm going now. There is no time to wait."
    And with that, the door clicks, the rain pours in and she's off
like a bullet.
    I can't believe she's just run out of the car. "I'm going after her."
    Before Gordon can stop me, I'm outside chasing Adanna.
    In two seconds, I'm soaked to the bone. This must have been
what it was like when God flooded the earth. Running after a hazy
figure, my foot slips on a rock and I go tumbling like a log down a
hill. A deluge of water yanks my other foot out from under me. A
second later, I'm lying on my stomach.
    At this point, a random, unexpected sense of gratitude for
pain pills wells up in my soul. I could die here and not even care.
There's mud in my eyes. Everything is shapeless. I'm being absolutely
hammered by drops of rain. A strange thought crosses my mind, how
1 9 0 T o m Da v i s




in the world can people living in these mud huts stay dry during a
rainstorm like this?
    "Adanna!" I'm not sure she can hear me. "Adanna, help me!"
    "Stuart? Where are you?" It's her voice.
    "Over here, Adanna, down in the gulley."
    "Oh my, how did you get there? Are you okay?"
    "I'm not sure, I haven't tried to move."
    "Let me help you up. Ready?"
    "Ouch! Nope, that's not gonna work. Get Gordon."
    "Okay, stay put. I'll be right back."
    "I'm won't go anywhere, I promise!"
    The raging water is getting higher. If it continues to rise, I will be
completely buried in minutes.
    Gordon's booming voice is music to my ears.
    "I can't leave you alone for a second."
    With Gordon's help, I'm able to get to my feet. Thank God for that.
We're all drenched as we make our way back to the Land Cruiser.
    "I know you're not going to like this, Gordon, but I think
Adanna is right after all. We really need to go to Matsapha." Gordon
looks out the rear window. "Either direction we go, we're gonna be in
the flood zone, so we might as well drive toward Matsapha." Gordon
guns the Land Cruiser into reverse and then quickly forward.
    Adanna is sitting in the middle of the backseat, leaning forward.
We're all leaning forward, straining to see out the front window
covered in a oily gray glaze.
    The drive to Matsapha isn't easy. We can barely distinguish the
road from the water. The village looks like a ghost town. The rain
shows no sign of letting up.
Scared                                                           191




    "Gordon, watch out!"
    "What the--"
    The brakes lock up, and we're skiing on mud. Sliding to the
right, then the left. Gordon has no control of the vehicle.
    "Hold on."
    Adanna screams.
    "Hold on, honey."
    As we complete a 360, the vehicle smashes into a huge green
Dumpster. Gordon's hair is wild, and it looks like he's hit his head on
the steering wheel. We all look out and see a steep embankment just
beyond the Dumpster.
    "Is everyone all right?" I shout louder than I need to, even with
the noise. Mercifully, I wouldn't know if I had hurt myself.
    "I'm all right. I never thought I'd be thanking God for a rubbish
bin," Gordon says.
    "Adanna, how about you?" She's holding her head.
    "I am fine. Can we please just try to go?"
    "Move your hand, let me see."
    She reveals a small bump above her eye. That will surely turn
into quite a shiner.
    "Ouch. Honey, that's a good one."
    "I'll be okay." Of course she will. This is nothing compared to
what her body has already suffered.
    The rain continues to pound.
    "Are we stuck?"
    "I don't think so. But there's another problem. Look."
    A wall of water appears magically, like on that tour at Universal
Studios, except this flood won't be redirected last-minute, leaving us
1 9 2 T o m Da v i s




with quickened heartbeats and damp shirts. We're about to discover
the immense power of Mother Nature's secret weapon.
    "What do we do?"
    "We have no choice. Surely it's not as deep as it looks. Okay,
Adanna, your job is to hold on and pray. This could get wild."
    Gordon yells, "Hold on, everyone." Gordon points us toward
the wall of water. As soon as we hit it, we start to float. Our Land
Cruiser has been transformed into a boat. The sensation would be
exhilarating if it weren't so frightening. We're out of control, and
there's nothing we can do about it.
    "So, maybe it is a little deeper than it looks. How's that praying
going, Adanna?"
    In a matter of seconds the water carries us into a deeper tributary
of this brand-new river, and we are flying at high speed, pushed by
the force of the current.
    "Gordon, you have to do something, or we're going to die!" I
yell. He looks like he's seen a ghost.
    "I'm doing everything I know to do. Nothing's working."
    An uprooted tree slams into the side of our vehicle with a
crunching thud.
    "If we get pulled under, we won't stand a chance."
    "I'm trying!"
    Adanna places a hand on my shoulder; the other is wrapped
securely around my headrest. She says, calmly, "Okay. I'm doing my
job. I said a prayer, and everything will be fine."
    I'm not sure if she really believes this or is trying to make us all
feel better.
    "We're going to hit a tree! Hold on!"
Scared                                                            193




     A screen of gray rushing water appears out of the left corner of
the windshield. It's filled with tree limbs and trash. It slams into the
middle of the car and pushes us away from the unmoving tree and to
the edge of the water.
     Then we stop, just as suddenly as we were swept away.
     "Whoa, this thing really is an amphibious vehicle."
     "Oh, I had it under control the whole time," Gordon laughs
nervously.
     "Someone had it under control, but I don't think it was you,
Gordon."
     I look at Adanna. She's smiling.
     "You are right. And I saw him too" she says. "The illuminated
man, right there in the water. He knew what we needed."
     Gordon and I look at each other and give a shrug. But I don't
question it. Maybe God is finally making an appearance in this little
girl's life. It's about time.
     The tires grip the mud and pull us to safety. Gordon's driving
leg is shaking. In spite of the narcotics, my hands vibrate like I've
downed ten cups of coffee.
     Ordinarily, the trip to Matsapha wouldn't take long at all--
maybe ten or fifteen minutes. But we've been slowed down terribly.
We could have walked faster. Well, except for the flood, of course.
Finally, we close in.
     The area is unrecognizable.
     "Adanna, is this it?"
     "Yes, this is it. But I've never seen so much water. The creek is
now a river."
     A very angry river.
1 9 4 T o m Da v i s




    "Stuart, do you see that? There are people trapped in the river,"
Gordon cries out.
    "Where? I can't see."
    "Right there. Look at the crowd, they're trying to fish people out
of the water with those sticks."
    "Lord in heaven, I see it. Let's go."
    Before another word is spoken, Adanna is out of the vehicle and
running toward the gathered crowd.
    "Adanna, wait!"
    But she isn't listening.
    We're all running fast on the slippery surface, like ducks
skimming the water before takeoff. We arrive at what is now the
riverbank. There are six, maybe eight, homes poking through the
raging current, and the leftovers of several other homes float down
the river at high speed. But the most horrendous site is the children,
dozens of them, stuck in the current, lodged in trees, grasping onto
buildings, floating on wood, clinging to life.
                     Chapter Twenty

432 234
    Tagoze

The day begins like any other, a typical African day--boring, long,
and dry.
    But as the afternoon rolls in, the temperature becomes unusually
cool, and the wind starts to howl. I look up and am shocked at how
fast the cloud are filling the sky. The swirls of gray and white twist and
turn, running into each other like an angry mob. A storm is brewing.
    A deafening crack of thunder gives way to a bright white streak
warning everyone to get inside. I grab the chessboard and pieces and
tuck them under my arm. I will invite the chief to play another day.
    Very little light shines through the walls in my house, just enough
so I can read on a bright day. But all light is extinguished in a matter
of minutes on this day.
    It seems a good day for an early nap.
    I lie down on my mat and begin to drift into dreams. Thunder
pulls me awake now and again, but it is a more unusual sound that
snaps me to alertness--the sound of people yelling and screaming. I
stand, go to the door and peer through the pouring rain.
    I step into the downpour and follow the sound. Before my eyes,
a wall of water races toward a small crowd, chasing them. The water
is uprooting trees and swallowing homes.

                                  195
1 9 6 T o m Da v i s




    They will not be able to outrun it.
    Without thinking, I take off running to homes still in the path
of the raging flood. A dozen small children stand frozen before me.
    "Run! Run this way!" I yell to them. But they can't hear me.
    I run toward them, waving my arms. But the wall of water is too
swift, and it devours them.
    I stop, uncertain for a moment where to run, how to act. Then I
whisper a quiet prayer.
    "Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Please help."
    It is total and utter chaos at the water's edge. A mother is fighting
the current, holding tight to her two children. She will not be able to
hold them for much longer.
    I take a step toward the rushing water. Tree limbs are snapping
like toothpicks, people are screaming for their lives.
    "Tagoze! No, wait. What are you doing?"
    It's Adanna. I offer a quick wave, then turn and dive into the
water. It sweeps me under, and for a moment I am caught by it. I
spin out of control, knocked by branches and uprooted thorn bushes.
Suddenly, I surface--just feet from the mother and her children. She
is swept off her feet.
    I launch myself in her direction. The debris grabs at my feet and
smacks against my chest. A bramble races by, clawing new scars across
my face. Blood mingles with murky water, but still I fight forward.
    "Dear God, give me strength!"
    I stand against the current, and the woman slams into me.
Quickly, I wrap my arms around her and her frightened children.
Together, we are pulled downstream.
    "God, please help us."
Scared                                                            197




    I turn my head to see a tree standing tall and strong in the middle
of the river. Its old roots must have spent hundred of years digging
into the crust of the earth. It's the last one standing in the path of
nature's fury.
    "Lady, hold on to me, and hold tight to your children," I say.
With one arm free, I pull at the water, steering, fighting, wrestling
with invisible foes.
    The tree arrives faster than anticipated. I hold tight to the woman
and swing myself around to take the brunt of the hit. Bam! My body
crunches against the tree. I am momentarily dazed.
    I reach up out of the water and catch a sturdy branch. With a
surge of energy, I pull myself toward the tree trunk, but the force of
the water spins me around, and the woman slips out of my arms. I
lunge for her and grasp the collar of her dress. Mustering all of my
strength, I pull her back toward the tree, praying that the cloth will
not tear.
    Her children are trailing behind her, one held by each of her
weary arms, but the smallest is slipping. My muscles straining, I
manage to pull her against the crashing current back toward the tree.
She is within reach. She could grab it, but her arms are still wrapped
around her children.
    "You have to grab the branch. I need you to grab the branch!"
    "I can't!" she screams.
    "The current is too strong. I can't hold you here for long. You
must grab the branch."
    "But my children!"
    "I will count to three. When I get to three, let go of your son and
grab the branch. I will catch him. I promise I will catch him."
1 9 8 T o m Da v i s




    "I am afraid!"
    "God is with us. Be strong! Hold tight to the little girl. I will
help her next. Ready?"
    The woman nods.
    "Remember ... on `three,' use your right arm to grab the branch.
And hold on for life."
    "One, two, three!"
    She lets go of her son and reaches for the branch. My long reach
enables me to grab the boy by the arm. But as the woman pulls
herself up onto the branch, a sudden surge rips her little daughter
away from her grasp.
    "Bisa, no!"
    A log appears out of nowhere and hits the flailing girl with the
force of a charging rhino. She is swept downstream.
    "Grab the limbs and climb into the tree," I yell. The little boy
clambers onto my shoulders and up into the high branches. His
mother stares downstream, wailing.
    "Climb into the tree now!" I find strength I did not know I had
and pull her up, out of the water, laying her across a branch that has
not yet been submerged by the flood.
    I am too tired to climb up into the branches with them so I hang
on tight instead.
                  Chapter Twenty-one

The rain has slowed to a steady drizzle, but the water continues to
rise in the valley. Adanna, Gordon, and I stand on the bank scanning
the gnarled trees one by one for any sign of Precious and Abu. I am
looking under the cover of a bright yellow poncho through the lens
of my camera. Old women and mothers are clutching babies, telling
one another to hold on. Old men perch on branches, and children
lean into the trees in defense against the wind.
    I snap a photo of a bicycle being carried by the current. It is
upright, as if ridden by an invisible man.
    Gordon turns to me. The wind and rain have matted and twisted
his white hair. His left eye swollen shut.
    "Nobody deserves this." His typical optimism has long since
departed. I keep snapping. I focus on each frame independently,
considering light, perspective, and subject matter, independent from
context and yet conveying it at the same time. This is why I'm good
at my job. This is why I won an award.
    This is who I am.
    Adanna steps into frame. "They are not there," she says, pointing
toward the raging river.
    I can see the photo caption: Village girl looks into the trees for lost
brother and sister. I focus for a close shot.

                                  199
2 0 0 T o m Da v i s




    Her face bears the marks of the abuse she has suffered, a crusted-
over cut next to her eye, a swollen lip. Her clothes, now soaked, hang
like rags on her undernourished body. Her eyes hold rivers of blue
sorrow. Even so, the lens reveals a girl with a curious dignity, one that
can come only from a spirit of fire.
    She looks right at the camera and says in a clear, strong voice, "I
am going to look for Pastor Walter and see if he has seen Abu and
Precious." I snap her picture. She ignores the camera.
    "Stuart, will you please help me?"
    I pull off my poncho, look at Gordon, and he nods. I hand him
the camera and follow Adanna.
    The rain has picked up again and beats down around us. We're
headed to the river and right into the middle of the devastation.
    "Adanna, wait!"
    The water is like a herd of crazed elephants destroying everything
in its path. A house with a thatched roof floats down the river at the
mercy of the current.
    I see something else floating next to a log.
    "Oh no!" It's a tiny head bobbing up and down and tossed in the
waves like a rag doll.
    I back up from the water's edge, and then like a long jumper, I
run, plant, and hurl myself into the raging river.
    My head smacks against something hard, blurring my vision.
I see two of everything. Focusing with all my energy on the child
still bobbing toward me, I maneuver against the current, positioning
myself to catch the child.
    I will have only one chance at this.
    Here she comes ...
Scared                                                            201




    I reach over and grab her by the back of the shirt, then pull
her into my arms. A sudden wave knocks me off my feet and for a
moment we are both underwater. The wave turns away, and we pop
up to the surface.
    "God, for the sake of this child, give me strength."
    She is shivering but still breathing.
    With every ounce of strength, I rocket toward the bank, clawing
at the water with one arm while holding tight to the little girl with
the other. Every second is critical. The edge is drawing closer and
closer. Suddenly, my work is made light as a current sweeps us close
to the bank. A man is standing there, holding a long branch out for
me to grab.
    He looks out of place. His hair is white, and his ebony skin
almost seems to glow. He has light blue eyes, lighter than Whitney's,
and he is smiling. I grab the branch with my free arm and lock it in
place. He easily pulls us to safety. I'm bent over, gasping and coughing
up water that tastes like dirt and sweat.
    The little girl is crying. When I turn to thank the blue-eyed man,
he is gone. The child and I are alone. I climb to my feet and, holding
the little girl's hand, start walking along the bank upstream.
    The child is whimpering.
    "It's okay. You're gonna be okay." Something sticky drips down
my face. I swipe at it and look at my hand. This country is taking a
lot of my blood.
    The area around the river looks like a war zone. Trees are
uprooted, rocks, tin, and straw are cast aside in piles, the remnants
of what use to be homes. Dead animals pepper the area, victims of
the initial flood surge.
2 0 2 T o m Da v i s




    Ahead of me I see lines of people along the shore, reaching into
the river with large sticks, perhaps saving lives. Perhaps watching
loved ones die.
    This child and I are soaked to the core, and she begins to shake
violently. What I wouldn't give for a down comforter to wrap her in.
Instead, I lift her up and pull her close. I feel a tearing in my back and
for the first time since the rain began am reminded of my stab wound.
    I start toward a small crowd that has gathered ahead. Maybe
somebody will recognize her. I wonder where Adanna has gone.
    A Swazi man up ahead looks at me and stares. I turn my body so
he can see the girl's face and shout, "Do you know this little girl?"
    He shakes his head no. My steps become harder to take, and the
weight of the little one heavier. I want to tell this girl that we'll find
her mommy, but I don't know her language.
    And I don't know if her mommy is still alive.
    Out of the blue, a song comes to me. It is a song I haven't sung
in decades, but one I have never forgotten. Perhaps the melody came
from the wind in the trees, or maybe I heard it in the child's rhythmic
whimper.
    I start to hum "Amazing Grace." The little girl looks up at me. I
smile, and she rests her head back on my chest. She seems calmer.
    As I get closer to the crowd, I hear Swazi voices and see people
pointing toward the water. Two people are stuck in a towering tree
in the middle of the now raging river. It is a woman and a child. No,
wait ... there is a third. A man, still in the water, hanging on for life
to a branch that is almost completely submerged.
    Even at a distance, I know this man.
    Tagoze.
Scared                                                              203




    "Stuart, Stuart, over here!"
    Peering over the crowd, I see Adanna smiling with Precious and
Abu at her side. Thank God. Precious and Abu run toward me, and
Precious hugs my wet leg.
    "Oh, Adanna, I'm so happy." I start to cry.
    "Stuart, you have blood all over your face. What happened to
you?"
    "Something hit me while I was trying to save this little girl. Do
you know who she is?" I turn the shivering child around.
    Her eyes light up and she blurts out, "Yes! That's Mrs. Malaza's
little girl, Bisa. Come, come! You must come with me." She starts
toward the crowd and motions for me to follow.
    "Who is Mrs. Malaza?" Why does that name sound familiar?
    "She's Pastor Walter's wife's sister. And she's over there." Adanna
points to the tree in the middle of the river. "In the tree with Tagoze."
    I move as close as possible to the bank. Adanna, Precious, and
Abu trail behind.
    "Stay away from the current," I tell them, as I lift this little girl
into the air.
    "Mrs. Malaza! It's Bisa! Bisa!"
    The sound of the water is so overbearing that even though I'm
screaming at the top of my lungs, I am sure Mrs. Malaza can't hear
me. I start jumping around like a mad man, waving one arm wildly.
    I can feel the emotion of the crowd behind me changing, with
cascading exclamations of "Oh!" rippling out around me. Others
begin to yell Bisa's name and point. I hold the little girl higher. She
sees her mom, and she is crying out, "Momma!"
    The voices continue to shout out around me in a wild antiphonal
2 0 4 T o m Da v i s




chorus. Finally, I see Tagoze point, and Mrs. Malaza looks toward us
to finally notice her daughter. I cannot see Mrs. Malaza's face clearly,
but I can tell life has returned, her body suddenly stronger, taller as
she holds tight to the tree branches.
    Swazi women come and embrace me, kiss my bloodied cheek.
Men grab my shoulder then my hand in a traditional gesture, only
this time, they bow. The highest honor they could pay.
    "Stuart, you have done something very good today. Very, very
good." Adanna, holding Abu, has come beside me. Precious stands
on the other side, and along with the crowd we all look out toward
the ancient tree.
    Now, how do we get them to shore?


The crowd turns into a wave as a series of ancient army green vehicles
pull up from the muddy main road, brakes squealing loudly. Men in
light blue uniforms pour out. They start unloading lifesaving devices
that look like they've come from a World War II movie--canoes,
stretchers, boxes of who knows what, and rope. They are all carrying
handguns, and one guy is even carrying a World War II machine gun.
    Most of the rescuers are walking, not running, so the villagers
help drag the supplies to the riverbank across from the great tree.
Everyone is talking in S'swati; some of the men in blue seem to be
arguing. I sit with the child, who hasn't left me since I pulled her
out of the water. The current is still swift, but it seems the river is no
longer rising.
    Even though I don't understand them, I can tell the rescuers are
confused. They're firing questions and suggestions back and forth,
and the villagers are joining in the discussion.
Scared                                                               205




    "What are they saying?" Adanna is sitting next to me with her
legs crossed.
    "A man in blue is saying, `How long do we wait before the rescue
begins?' And a villager is saying, `You have waited long enough, now
go ahead.' Then the man in blue says, `But wouldn't it be better for
the river to slow down first?' And the man in the white shirt is saying,
`No, that would mean we wait for days!' He is angry."
    I can see the fury build in this villager.
    "Now, they are talking about people getting the chills from being
in the water too long."
    "Ah, hypothermia."
    "Yes, they are saying they must have the strongest men help, so
they can pull them out of the water fast."
    I've been told this is the coldest it's been in Africa for fifty years,
so hypothermia is a real possibility. But it seems ridiculous. To me,
it's just a cool summer day.
    This discussion goes on for well over fifteen minutes, until the
man with the most medals across his chest makes a decision. The
rescue will commence--now.
    They throw the rope several times before Tagoze is able to catch
it. The rope is tied around the young boy first.
    "Hold onto the rope as tightly as you can." The crowd repeats
the command.
    Adanna stands to get a better look, but I remain seated. My back
is pulsing with pain.
    "Bisa, look--here comes your brother." Her eyes are fixed on
the tree.
    Looking upstream for dangerous debris and finding the coast
2 0 6 T o m Da v i s




clear, the light blue men give the signal. The boy leaps from the tree
branches, and five men pull him through the water as quickly as
possible. The little boy looks like a lure spinning on the top of the
water, and in about thirty seconds, he is safely ashore. Everyone
cheers. Village women pass him around, planting kisses on his wet
cheek, then deliver him to me.
    "Here, Stuart, let me take the boy." Walter is suddenly beside
me. He lifts the boy into his arms and wraps him in a joyous hug.
    "Hello, Walter. Bisa is safe too." Bisa stays still in my arms.
    They toss the rope out to the tree again. It takes four tries before
Tagoze is able to grab it. When the woman has tied herself in the
rope, she is given the signal to jump.
    As she jumps, five men pull and she flies through the air as if
shot out of a cannon. She hits the water with a thud, and the rope
makes an ominous snapping sound. But moments later, she is pulled
safely to shore.
    "Here comes your momma," I whisper to Bisa.
    Adanna and I walk toward her. Dripping wet and covered in
river plants and twigs, she makes a beeline in our direction. She runs
more like an Olympic athlete than a woman who's almost lost her
daughter or even her own life. I place the little girl in her arms. She
buries the little girl in her chest, heaving between her sobs. A twinge
of sadness escapes from my heart when I let her go.
    "Jesus heard my prayer. He saved you; He saved you," she says.
    The women gather around us, and shouts of "Praise the Lord" and
"Hallelujah" fill the valley like a chorus of angels. I am crying again.
Africa has opened the valve to my tear ducts, and now it won't shut.
    She says something to Adanna, and Adanna answers.
Scared                                                              207




    "She asked if you saved her. I told her yes."
    The woman drops to her knees and grabs my legs with one
arm. "Thank you, thank you, thank you," she says in English. Her
gratitude is more than I can bear. I am unraveling.
    I put one hand on her head, the other on Bisa's. The only thing
I can think of to say is, "God bless you. He is good." I don't stop to
question the reason for the flood or the lives that have been lost or
man's inhumanity to man. I just do my very best to believe--if only
for a moment--in God's goodness.
    As we are rejoicing, there is a terrible sound. At first it is like
thunder, but it echoes louder and longer than any thunder I have
heard. Everyone turns toward the river to see this magnificent
tree--this ancient, deeply rooted symbol of security and hope--snap
in two. The river carries the broken tree away with ease.
    A chorus of anxious cries pours out across the river. All that is left
of the tree is a ten- or twelve-foot-tall section of trunk, rising above
the water and one short, twisted branch that rests perpendicular
against it near the top. It is in the very same moment when I notice
how much the broken tree resembles a cross that I realize Tagoze is
nowhere to be seen.
    He has been washed away.
                 Chapter Twenty-two

It takes two village men and four of the blue suits to pull Tagoze's
bloated body onto the riverbank. When we hear the shouts, everyone
runs downriver. The villagers circle around Tagoze. Some bend down
to touch his forehead. There's no such thing as distance from death
or the dying here.
    A good man has died. In his wake, everything has stopped--even
the rescuers pause. The women cry out, releasing their grief for Tagoze
and for their land and their people. The few men standing around
him fall to their knees, shout, and extend their hands to God.
    I keep my distance, but I feel his loss as if we had been brothers.
There is a great heaviness in my heart, but it is not just over Tagoze.
I grieve for these people. And there is something else tugging at me.
Something in my own heart. Something from long years ago.
    Suddenly I realize how completely exhausted I am. I fall to my
knees, then curl up on the muddy ground and am whisked away into
a feverish memory.


I am closed away in my room, listening to the sounds of booming
thunder and machine-gun rain pounding the dilapidated metal shed
outside my window. We had moved to California because my mom
had just married my new dad.

                                208
Scared                                                             209




    Don had been an E-9 Master Chief in the navy. He had all kinds
of medals and flags he wore like prizes on his silky white uniform.
He also sported a white hat with a shiny black bill. He looked every
bit the patriot and military officer. But he didn't look so stately those
times mom and I came home to find him passed out, slumped in
the chair on the front porch, drool running down the front of that
white uniform.
    He was a big man, bigger than most adult men I had ever met.
At six foot three inches tall, he towered over my boyish frame. He
had a kind face and a thick brown mustache. I remember his walk,
long, with his feet pointed out like a waddling duck. When he
pushed the rototiller through the garden, he left huge footprints in
the freshly turned dirt. I followed behind, matching my footsteps to
his. I wanted to be just like him.
    His arms were hairy, scarred, and tattooed. On his right arm
was a tattoo of the Seabee emblem. It made me think of honeybees.
Honeybees toting machine guns. His arms were strong, like cannons.
If he was on your side, you were in great shape. If not, then you had
much to fear.
    One night our new family went to the CPO club on the naval
base. That was before he and my mom got married. I was feeling like
a big man, dancing my heart out on the dance floor with a pretty lady,
a blonde with long dark eyelashes and golden skin. She reminded me
of a swimsuit model. She must've been at least thirty, and she made
my young heart beat fast. I was in love.
    I was sure I would marry her or maybe my new fourth-grade
teacher, Mrs. McNulty. I was on the dance floor, practicing my
American Bandstand routine. I worked out the beginning of a spin
2 1 0 T o m Da v i s




but couldn't quite plant it, and I ended up face-first on the floor. My
red-faced humiliation was interrupted by movement over by the bar.
    To my right, a fight exploded. My soon-to-be dad was in the
middle of it. His shirt was ripped apart, but he had one of the men in
the air. The man went flying over the bar like one of my paper airplanes
and crashed on the floor. He didn't move. Another guy came charging
at Don, and one punch later, he was on the floor looking just like my
dead grandpa I had seen in a wooden box a few weeks earlier, minus
the brown suit. That's the moment Don became a hero to me. He was
Conan the Barbarian. He grabbed my mom's arm on one side and
mine on the other, and he marched us out of there like the Law in one
of those Westerns he used to fall asleep to on Saturday afternoons.
    I am back in my room now, and the rain is still pouring down.
My mom and Don have been arguing in the kitchen. I walk down the
hall to see what is going on. They don't see me peering in from behind
the door. He is yelling terrible words at her at the top of his lungs.
    "You worthless whore! I hate you and that stupid kid of yours."
    With that, he spits at her, raises his fist in the air, and starts
pounding her like a jackhammer. One blow lands on her nose and
blood splatters across the kitchen. I don't know what else to do; I am
scared. My hero has become my enemy.
    I charge at him, both fists flailing in the air and landing on his
legs and midsection. I wish I were fifty feet tall so I could beat the
crap out of him and he would never come back.
    "Leave her alone! Leave her alone," I yell. "Why are you doing
this, Dad?"
    I wish I could take back my words. He is not my dad. He is a
monster and I hate him.
Scared                                                            211




    He looks down at me with rage in his eyes. He hates me; I know
it. There is nothing I can do to change that.
    His fist comes down so fast I don't have time to move. It catches
me smack in the mouth. I fly across the room like one of the rocks I
used to launch at the moon with my slingshot, and I land against a
dining-room chair as it collapses under me.
    Reaching up to my mouth, I open my lips and spit a tooth into
my cupped hand. It mingles with streaky lines of red spit and dark
blood. Then blood begins to pour out of my mouth. My mother runs
over to me to help as best she can, both of us are bleeding and scared.
    As soon as I can, I run away to my room. I sit there for hours
until I hear the thunder. Then I quietly walk past my mom's closed
door--I can still hear her sniffling and groaning--then through the
kitchen and out the back door. I stand in the summer rain, letting
it wash over me. I start to walk, and as I do, I get angry. Angry at
everything and everyone and especially God. Why didn't God stop
Don from hurting us?


"Stuart, are you okay?"
    It's Gordon, and he's covered with mud.
    "I'm ... I'm fine. No ... I'm exhausted."
    "What's going on over there?" He nods his head toward the
crowd.
    "It's Tagoze. He's dead."
    "Oh, sweet Jesus, no."
    "He saved the lives of a mother and son, Gordon. He risked his
own life ... he lost his own life ... to save them."
    I think back to what he said the other day. Was it yesterday?
2 1 2 T o m Da v i s




    "A fire burns in me to do what I can for my people. Though I am but
one man, I will not stop trying."
    Gordon shakes his head.
    I put my hand on his shoulder, and we both walk toward the
crowd, now quieting down.
    "Gordon, what will they do next?"
    "I don't know, Stuart. I just don't know."
    Mrs. Malaza sees me. She says something to Gordon in S'swati.
    "Stuart, you saved this woman's child!"
    I suddenly remember the strange man on the bank. "I had some
help." I smile at the woman and at her daughter, Bisa, who looks
shyly at me.
    As the crowd disburses, we see Pastor Walter and Adanna
standing over Tagoze. A little girl who looks about Adanna's age runs
up and wraps her arms her. She is barefoot, her clothes are shredded,
and blood is dripping from her leg.
    Adanna wraps her arms around the girl. "Tobile!"
    Tobile looks down and apparently recognizes Tagoze.
    "Why does God have to take the good people? Why can't He
take a bad man?" Tobile cries.
    I've been asking myself the same question.
    Gordon has taken out his notebook and is writing in it. But this
time he is not writing quickly, a mad dash to make sure his pen keeps up
with his thoughts. Instead, he is writing slowly, deliberately. I wonder
what words could possibly capture the magnitude of this disaster.
    "Get your camera," he says. It is not a command. There is sadness
in his voice. I start to balk, then pause.
    He's right.
Scared                                                           213




    I need to get a picture of Tagoze's face. I need to get photos
of Pastor Walter's sister, and Bisa. I need to capture the bodies, the
mess, this inverted hell where water tortures and destroys. This is
why I'm here. It is my job.
    I walk down the bank toward the car. I feel as if my feet are made
of cement. I step past bodies, some lying as if taking an afternoon
nap. One stops me in my tracks.
    A woman is standing near this body. She has been helping others
carry the dead. To where? I'm not sure. Perhaps she knows.
    "Excuse me? Do you speak English?"
    "Yes."
    "Do you know this man?"
    "I do, that's Malako Umbeni."
    I knew it. Adanna's uncle. He has scratches and bruise marks on
his bloated face. Not all of those came from being battered by the
floodwaters.
    "He was an evil man," she says, then looks down at him as if to
spit.
    "Yes, I know." I feel some satisfaction in his death, but I am
also surprised by a quiet sadness that sneaks into my heart. Perhaps
he has gotten what he deserved. But now, there is no chance for his
redemption.
    The woman's gaze moves to someone behind me, and I turn to
look. It's a large woman with cold eyes. She looks me up and down.
    "D, I am sorry about your husband," the woman says in front
of me.
    So this is Adanna's aunt. I nod at her and step aside.
    Looking at her face, I see no tears, no sense of remorse. She
2 1 4 T o m Da v i s




pushes him with her foot, as if trying to make sure he's really dead.
There's almost a look of relief.
    My shoes sink several inches into the mud with each step back up
the hill. My body is covered from head to toe in black African soil.
    "Stuart!" I turn to see Adanna running toward me. She stops
short when she sees her aunt ... and her uncle.
    She stands, staring at her aunt, neither of them moving. Then
Adanna moves forward and puts her frail arm around her aunt's big
torso. Her aunt is stiff at first, but she begins to soften. She hugs
Adanna and then kisses her head over and over.
    I scrape the caked dirt from my hands as best I can with a cloth from
the car and pull out my gear. My body is so weary, I could crawl into the
car and sleep for a year, but I latch my camera to the tripod, walk back
down toward the riverbank, set it down, and begin to shoot.
    Frame after frame, I chronicle a people's despair. Tagoze is on his
back, his face swollen and barrel-sized chest bloated. Someone has
placed his hands on his midsection. With one click, I capture the
death of a hero. I turn the camera to see Walter talking with his wife
and sister-in-law. They don't notice me, but when I look through the
lens, I see Bisa, her eyes staring right at me. Behind her I make out a
familiar figure: white hair, black skin, blue eyes. The man who helped
me out of the river. He's smiling. I click the shutter. A lingering crack
of thunder turns my head away for a moment, and when I turn back,
Bisa smiles at me, but the man is gone.


"We need to get this story out there fast, Stu. These people need
help." We are driving through the muck and water-filled potholes,
headed back to the hotel.
Scared                                                          215




    "Yeah. Hey, Gordon, have you ever seen a man in the village
with white hair and blue eyes?"
    "What, like a colored? They don't have those around here, only
in South Africa."
    "A what? No, very black skin."
    "Never saw him. You can ask Walter when we go back--he seems
to know everyone."
    The brakes grind as we come to a halt in front of the Mountain
Inn and wait for the gate to open. There's a smell of burning oil
coming from the car. The concierge greets us, looking the same as
always, apparently unchanged by the day's events. He gives us a funny
look when we step out of the vehicle. Gordon and I are covered with
mud and muck from the river.
    "The flood," I say.
    He just looks at us inquisitively.
    "The flood in Matsapha," as if I owe him an explanation.
    "Well, it's lovely to see you back, sir."
                Chapter Twenty-three

Looking out from the window from my hotel room, the only evidence
of rain I can see is the steam rising out of the saturated ground. The
earth looks as if it's taking a smoke break.
    I can't believe how late it is--nine o'clock. It feels like someone
shoved gunpowder in the wound on my back and lit it on fire. I
can't imagine what it was exposed to in that floodwater. I step into
the bathroom. The remnants of last night's shower remain in the
bottom of the tub, black organic material that seems to be affixed
with Bondo. Running my hands through my hair, I am reminded of
the baseball that's formed on my forehead.
    My cell rings.
    "Hello."
    "Hey, Stuart! How you faring today, man?" It's Gordon, and he's
back to his chipper self.
    "More than a little hungover from that beating yesterday. You?"
    "About the same. I'll bring you some yarrow-herb salve I made
for your nasty back wound. It'll help it heal and prevent infection."
    "Just some coffee and Advil will be good for me, thanks all the
same."
    He laughs. "You can have 'em all. I'll be there around noon, and
we can head back to Walter's care point. I've got someone working

                                 216
Scared                                                            217




on the car now, so we should be good to go. I've been writing since
six this morning, and I want to get this article out."
    "Yeah, I need to look over these photos and download them to
the server in the States. Send me the article when you're ready?"
    "Right. God, let's hope this does some good." Sounds more like
a prayer than a statement.
    "I'm with you on that, my friend."
    I call down for coffee, boot up my computer, and pull out my
gear. Before I can even plug my camera into my laptop, I hear a
polite knock on the door.
    "Coffee, boss."
    I open the door, and the white-suited hotel hop wheels in a cart
with a silver coffeepot, sugar bowl, creamer, and cup meticulously
placed on a tray. They've included a dish of fruit and two pastries,
cheese, and some sort of berry.
    "Thank you." I dig in my pocket for some emalangeni and hand
him a tip.
    "Oh, thank you, sir. Let me know if you need anything more."
Ever obsequious, ever efficient, these hotel staff.
    I transfer the photos, taking care not to get my laptop sticky, and
scan through them. Some of the flood shots are perfect for the Times.
A mother and her baby in a tree, hanging over the rushing water.
More people hanging onto trees, desperation etched on their faces.
The one with the floating bicycle could be a prizewinner.
    I get to the photo I took right just as the sun was setting. The one
of Pastor Walter, his sister, and her children. It is a compelling shot,
full of emotion and packed with riveting detail. I can see the sweat
and dirt caked on Walter's face. But the black man with the blue eyes
2 1 8 T o m Da v i s




is missing. I zoom in to the section of the photo where he should be,
but it is just a blur. A trick of the light? But I was certain I saw him.
    My phone rings again.
    "Stuart here."
    "Just sent the article off to Bill and to you. You should get it any
second. See you at noon."
    "I'll look at it now. Hello?" Gordon rarely says good-bye, so I'm
never really sure when the conversation is over until I find myself
talking into a dead phone. I breeze through the first part of the article
and finish downloading my photos.


       Matsapha, Swaziland, Feb. 14--A flash flood in the southern
       quadrant of Manzini, Swaziland, the worst since a devastating
       flood in 2000, has forced scores out of their homes to seek
       higher ground. For hundreds in the area of Mankayane, this
       meant scrambling up trees to avoid the rushing waters of the
       river below.
           The death toll is believed in the hundreds, but local
       relief workers fear it will reach thousands. The affected area
       is already impoverished, with nearly half its population
       infected with HIV-AIDS. Now residents are without means
       for basic survival.
           The government of Swaziland says it has no need yet for
       international aid.
           Just halfway through the rainy season, forecasters
       predicted heavy rains, but no flood warnings went out to
       local residents. The region has been plagued by drought in
       recent years.
Scared                                                                 219




          "I have never seen anything like this here. It came like a
       giant wave, sweeping away much of our community," says
       resident Walter Malaza, who operates a care point to help
       orphans in his area. "We have been losing so many people to
       AIDS, we hardly had time to bury our dead before the flood,
       but now ..." The river bank is lined with hundreds of bodies
       dragged or washed up out of the waters.


    As I read the article, I realize that there truly are no words that
can completely capture the events of the past few days. The picture
will certainly help, but I am beginning to wonder if stories like this
really do any good.


Promptly at noon, Gordon pulls up in his Land Cruiser, and I hop
in beside him. He tosses a little container at me.
    "Put some of this on your back right now. It's concentrated, so
you don't need much. It will smart a bit, but then it will start to heal.
And it keeps infection away."
    The container holds something that looks like clear yellow
frosting and smells like the vitamin section of Vita-Cottage. That
place makes me think of people who join communes. Whitney likes
to shop there.
    "It's a yarrow paste. There are some other things in it, crushed
chrysanthemum, nettle--just try it."
    I take a good amount, reach around, and dab it onto my back.
"Ahh ... ow!" The stuff stings like fire.
    Gordon laughs. "It'll get better, and you'll be thanking me by
tomorrow."
2 2 0 T o m Da v i s




    The sting is already subsiding.
    "Good work on that article," I say through a wince.
    "What photos did you send?" The car jerks and bumps as Gordon
tries to keep on the high ground.
    "Some of the people hanging out of the trees. And a great one of
Walter and his sister-in-law and the girls."
    "And Tagoze?"
    "I didn't send it. The image wasn't sharp enough." This is a lie.
The image was stunningly sharp. Brilliant and haunting. I've never
held back a photo I knew was perfect ... until last night. "But about
the other one--the one with Bisa ... "
    "Yeah?" he looks over at me.
    "Remember how I asked if you knew the guy, the one who
helped us out of the river?"
    "The one that sounded like a colored. Mmm-hmm."
    "Well, I was sure I saw him standing in the background when I
took that picture. But when I looked at it, he wasn't there."
    "What do you mean?"
    "I mean he wasn't there."
    "Maybe you took your eyes off the shot, and he walked away
before you clicked the shutter."
    "No. I was looking through the eyepiece when I clicked it. That's
sort of how I do my job."
    "Whoa ... didn't mean to rattle your cage." We hit a particularly
deep pothole and my head nearly hits the roof.
    "Well, he was there and now he's not. That's all I know."
    "Maybe he was a ghost ... or an angel."
    "Yeah. I see dead people." I realize the inappropriateness of my
Scared                                                          221




words as soon as they spill out of my mouth. But Gordon doesn't
seem bothered. In fact, he chuckles softly.
    "This is a rare experience for you, isn't it."
    "What do you mean? Nearly drowning or having a man disappear
from my photo?"
    "Both. And more. This whole trip ... it's a one-of-a-kind
adventure for you."
    "I've been doing this for a long time, Gordon. Every trip is
different."
    "Ah ... but this one is different ... in a different way.
    "How so?"
    "You've been all over the world, right?"
    "Yeah."
    "And you've seen all kinds of things--the best and the worst our
world has to offer."
    "Especially the worst."
    "So ... what's on your mind, Stuart. What have you been
thinking about these past days?"
    "Huh ... wait, I don't understand."
    "What's been uppermost in your thoughts, your feelings?"
    "What are you, a shrink all of a sudden?"
    "Africa demands you become lots of things in order to survive.
So ... yeah, consider me your therapist for the day."
    "Well ... I've been thinking about big things. My purpose, I
suppose. And wondering where God is in all this. I mean ... He
watches as the world falls apart, but then ... when Adanna prayed for
us on our drive? I was certain He listened."
    "So you're confused ..."
2 2 2 T o m Da v i s




    "That's putting it mildly."
    "... and wondering ..."
    "Yes."
    "... and searching?"
    Yes. But for what?
    "The Bible says God has a hope and future for every person and
that He suffers right beside the suffering."
    He throws me a book that I recognize from the hospital. It is
Adanna's journal.
    "Adanna left it my car, and I couldn't resist looking through it.
She is an amazing writer and poet. I'm overwhelmed by her gift.
Read the page I have marked."


       I saw the bright path before me, and the illuminated man
       stretched out his hand. My body was being smothered and
       torn by an evil man, an animal, but I could sense love from
       the illuminated man. I asked the man, "Can I come home?"
       And he said, "No, this is not the time. Remember your gift,
       your purpose." And then he sent Tagoze to save me.


    I flip through the book, the pages filled with words.
    "This is really good stuff."
    "We need to do a story about her, Stu. I think that should be the
last in our series. And there's something else, too."
    We pull up to the clearing, and our conversation stops short.
    Gordon is as stunned as I am. Most of the people are huddled
around the church building--men, women, and children. Nobody is
running around playing games. They all sit still, quiet, like hopeless
Scared                                                           223




people confined to a refugee camp. The looks on their faces reveal a
submission to the immutable power of death. I've seen it in war-torn
countries too many times.
    To my right are as many as fifty freshly dug graves with mounds
of dirt lying beside each hole. We sit for a moment in the car. All the
color has left Gordon's face.
    "Oh, this is so much worse than I thought."
    The second the door opens and my foot hits the ground I am
rushed by a group of women and children. Several of them I know,
including the two head gogos who distribute food here ... when it's
available.
    "Please help us," they cry. I feel my insides gathering in twisted
knots.
    "What do you need?" Gordon has shifted into reporter mode.
    One of the gogos steps up to Gordon.
    "We need fresh water. We need food. Like this, we can't survive.
And look at our children."
    Many of them look sick and dehydrated. A few sit completely
naked on the ground, others are battered by cuts and scratches. Two
young children are lying together on their backs by the tree. I wonder
if they're already dead.
    The rain has washed away the few crops they had. The small
cornfield behind the mud hut is completely gone. The hut itself has
taken so much of a pounding, it has practically melted away. All that
remains are the broken pieces of the foundation, a number of stones,
and the tin roof.
    "I'll see what I can do." Gordon has pulled out his bulky satellite
phone. Those things can get a signal anywhere.
2 2 4 T o m Da v i s




    The crowd parts to allow us out of the vehicle.
    Walter makes a beeline for me. He looks like he's been through
the wringer. I can only imagine what the last twenty-four hours have
been like for him.
    "Stuart, thank God you came back."
    "Walter." I put my arm around him. "I wish the circumstances
were better, but I'm glad to see you again." His orange plaid shirt is
covered with dried-on muck and leaves. I look down at my clean
arms, freshly laundered shirt, and I feel shame. What I must look like
to him, to all these people. Walter doesn't seem to take notice.
    "Yes, thank you, my brother. And thank you for saving my niece,
Bisa. You spared my family even more grief."
    "I wish I could help more."
    "I'm sure you know that many of the people in this community
haven't had much food in a very long time."
    I nod.
    "This flood has made things so much worse. There is absolutely
no food, and we have been told all the wells are contaminated and we
cannot drink the water in the river for the same reason."
    "So there's really no food. None at all? And no water?"
    "Nothing. We've got to do something. There are so many villages
around here--and so many people, children who need help. Many
will die unless we do something. We are like sheep forgotten by our
government."
    I think of New Orleans after hurricane Katrina--the horrible
devastation, the bungled relief effort--but at least people were trying
to help. At least the media was covering it. I get the sense that isn't
the case in this country.
Scared                                                          225




    "All we can do when the children come to us for help is send
them away with the hope that tomorrow we'll have something."
    Gordon walks up from the car with a train of women and children
following behind him. "I've just made a call to some of my contacts
in Mbabane and New York, but I don't have any confirmation of
help. I'm sorry."
    "Thank you. You are a fellow believer and an important man. I
know you have a lot of influence. God will yet use you to help us."
    "How many people are we talking about who need assistance?"
Gordon tries to get to the facts.
    Walter turns to look behind him and waves his hand. As if on
cue, dozens of people crest the hill from the surrounding villages,
heading in our direction.
    "It's like someone sounded a call," I say.
    "Yes," Walter smiles in spite of the situation. "We have a very
sophisticated system of communication here. A young boy ran as
soon as you arrived and alerted one crowd. Someone ran to another,
and here they are."
    Gordon turns to me. "In this country, white people mean either
oppression or hope. And when you're desperate, it is hope they
choose to believe."
    "But we have no hope to give. Not even a drop."
    Pastor Walter is shaking his head. "What are we going to do?"
    The three of us stand dumbfounded as the wave of people
approaches. It is a bizarre scene, looking like something out of Dawn
of the Dead.
    I scan the crowd.
    "Have you seen Adanna, or her brother and sister?"
2 2 6 T o m Da v i s




    Gordon is looking across the crowd, sizing up the situation. "I
was just looking for them myself."
    "I haven't seen that child today," Walter answers and starts to
walk toward the crowd. Gordon follows behind him.
    "I'm going to check in on her." I shoulder my camera bag and
start walking.
    Gordon looks back at me, "Bring them here, if they'll come. I
hate to think of them alone."
    "Right. I'll be back as soon as I can."
    The ten-minute walk to Adanna's hut takes twenty minutes.
The storm has flung mud everywhere; on the trees, the cacti, the
devilbushes, and the rocks. Thousands of waterholes have formed on
the path, and I'm forced to dodge them every tenth step.
    Looking down into the small valley, I get a new perspective
of the destruction. Where homes use to stand are piles of broken
wood and twigs. Enormous trees look as if they've been yanked out
of the ground by some primordial giant and flicked to the side like
unwanted weeds.
    I see Adanna's house in the distance. It is one of the few that has
weathered the storm well.
    "Thank You, God," I whisper.
    As I get closer, I can't believe what I'm seeing. Outside of her
home are about two dozen children sitting together in clusters of
three or four, eating what looks like a home-cooked meal. Out of the
front door glides Adanna, as if she were the fairy godmother from the
Make-A-Wish Foundation. She has a stack of bread and a jar of jelly.
    "Adanna!" I call out to announce myself, and all of the heads
turn toward me.
Scared                                                             227




     "Mr. Stuart! What are you doing here?" I'm hit headlong by
Precious, and then Abu, who hug my legs. I laugh for the first time in
days. I give Precious a squeeze around the shoulder and take Abu into
my arm. I ignore the pain as my camera bag scrapes around my back.
     "What are you doing, Adanna? You look like you're running a
bed-and-breakfast."
     "A what?"
     "It's a place where people go to sleep overnight, and they get
breakfast in the morning." I realize how ridiculous this sounds.
     "Oh. Well, you gave me all this food, so I'm sharing it."
     "But that food was for you. Did you use it all?"
     She nods.
     "What are you, Abu, and Precious going to eat tomorrow?"
     "I don't know. I didn't think about it. These children were hungry
too." She waves her hand across the group, as if she is blessing them.
"It's okay, Mr. Stuart, because God will take care of us."
     "You didn't save anything?"
     "No."
     I shake my head and sigh.
     "Are you mad at me?"
     "Of course not." I feel horrible for my response. "Honey, how
could I ever be mad at you? We'll just have to figure out something
else."
     I put Abu down, give him a pat on the rear, and he runs back
to his playmates. Precious stays at my side, mimicking every one of
Adanna's words and expressions toward me.
     "Adanna, do you mind if I take some pictures of you and these
children?"
2 2 8 T o m Da v i s




    She looks sheepish and instinctively starts to smooth her skirt. I
can tell she made an effort to clean it.
    "Okay. It's okay," she says, as if confirming the answer to herself.
Through the lens, I see her stooping down to help a child not much
younger than she is. Adanna seems so much older today and yet so
frail. I step back to capture the whole scene. The kids are so focused
on eating, they no longer pay attention to me, except Precious, who
stays by my side.
    "Precious, beautiful girl, why don't you go help your sissy so I
can take your picture too?"
    "Precious, come," Adanna calls like a mother. Precious stamps
her foot hard and won't move. I laugh.
    "It's okay," I say to Adanna. Precious looks up at me and smiles.
I snap off dozens of shots, children of skin and bones, dried mud
and hanging clothes, grateful for a bit of food. They are living in this
moment only. To look back would be too painful; to look forward,
pointless. I have never felt so completely enveloped and powerless.
    I bend down to let Precious look through the lens.
    "Put your hand here, look through this little window, and then
press when you see the picture you want to take." Like Adanna, she
is tiny, but her constitution is steel. No one can rush her. She scans
with the camera slowly, stopping when she sees her sister, who is
looking at us with a quizzical eye.
    "There." She pushes the button. In America, I'd say she'd be
running her own company by the time she was fifteen. Here, I can't
even imagine a future. I am forced by the immediacy of this situation
to live in the moment right along with the children. It is strangely
calming.
Scared                                                           229




     I think about Gordon wanting to do a story on Adanna. Her
journal is still in the car.
     "Good work, Miss Assistant," I say to Precious, and Adanna
smiles.
     Suddenly a flash catches my eye, and I whirl around. A small
boy and girl run like streaks through the group, yelling as if there's
a fire.
     "They're here! They're here. Come quickly!"
     "Who's here?"
     "The big trucks. They're here, and they've come to save us."
     Finally! The cavalry has arrived. Help has come.
                 Chapter Twenty-four

Every step is like trying to break free from a giant suction cup.
    "I'll come in a few minutes, Mr. Stuart," Adanna calls to me
as I slog away, feet slapping through the muddy ground. The two
messengers take off like a shot, spraying clumps of mud through the
air, and I can't keep up.
    It feels strange, leaving Adanna and the children there. Of course,
they aren't in any hurry to leave. They have good food and a safe,
quiet place to rest. By the time I crest the hill, my shoes are caked in
mud, but the scene before me makes me forget all about them.
    Two giant eighteen-wheelers dominate the landscape. On the
side of each truck, painted in bold blue letters, are the words "A
Helping Hand." They must have had quite a journey getting here
over the bumps and rocks.
    The children are gawking at the huge vehicles in silence, as if
they were saucers that just swooped in from outer space. The women
huddle together in circles, hands linked and jumping up and down
in celebration. More and more people are gathering, and the hum of
energy is growing.
    Gordon has his notebook out. He's talking to a guy wearing a
suit and carrying a clipboard. He still has the Bluetooth headset on
his ear. I pull out my camera. The saints have landed, and they're

                                 230
Scared                                                             231




bringing gifts from the heavenly city. What a day. This is going to
make a great story.
    A squad of about twenty men dressed in blue pants and white
shirts gets to work like a professional rigging crew. They move in
machinelike fashion, putting together tables and roping off areas. I
walk over toward Gordon.
    "This is incredible, Gordon. I can't believe help arrived so
quickly."
    "Don't believe everything you see."
    "What are you talking about?"
    "There's some kind of an agenda here."
    "Agenda? What kind of agenda could there be in helping people
and giving them food?"
    "Not sure. Maybe they're the king's people on some kind of a
publicity stunt."
    "You're too suspicious."
    "Let's hope so."
    Within moments, the supplies are unloaded. Oddly, a perimeter
has been set up to keep people away from the provisions. Long tables
manned by the men and women in blue and white are flagged with
banners prominently displaying the name of the organization in
gigantic blue letters: "A Helping Hand." The subtitle below reads, "The
touch of loving-kindness." Still larger banners unfurl from the top of
the 18-wheelers, covering the whole side of the tractor-trailer.
    A young Swazi boy runs to Gordon's side and reaches up to grab
his hand.
    "Isn't it wonderful, Mr. Gordon? Look, they even have toys in
the trailer. I can see them."
2 3 2 T o m Da v i s




    "Yes, Zineela. Wonderful indeed." He pats the top of the boy's
dirty head in a fatherly fashion.
    Two representatives approach Pastor Walter. I can't hear what they're
saying, but from the looks of it, they want him to rally the group.
    I take a picture of Walter talking with these two men.
    "What's going on?" I ask Pastor Walter a moment later.
    "They want the people in lines to receive the aid in specific order:
first children, youngest to oldest; second, women and children; and
third, men."
    Walter's tired face holds an expression of joy. This is exactly what
he's been praying for. One of the men hands Walter a bullhorn, and
the crowd immediately quiets as Walter's familiar voice blares out the
instructions.
    "I don't know why you're so worried, Gordon. This is exactly
what these people need." Gordon doesn't respond.
    I scan the goods through my camera lens--huge crates of food,
water, clothing, and other supplies that look like soap, first-aid kits,
chlorine, detergent, and water-filtration systems of some type.
    The people from the villages fall into a practiced formation, the
older children guiding the younger. Then women followed by men.
    A large black four-wheel-drive van pulls up behind the trucks.
The windows are tinted dark. Even though the black exterior is
splattered with mud, I can see it is a nearly new vehicle. And an
expensive one. About ten nicely dressed men with walkie-talkies and
earpieces jump out of the cars and take up their positions, as if they're
clearing the perimeter for the arrival of an imperial guest.
    "Gordon, are you watching all of this?" I can't believe how subdued
the people are, talking quietly and waiting in lines like sheep.
Scared                                                           233




    "This is starting to take a weird turn. Keep shooting photos
until someone tells you to stop. I'm guessing it won't be long before
they do."
    "Yeah, either that or gun me down." I point at some of the
men armed with handguns. Now that the people are moving into
lines, Gordon and I stand out like we're wearing orange prison
jumpsuits.
    "Let's move toward the back." He motions for me to walk with
him.
    "The only time I've seen this kind of a setup is when a head of
state or president of a country was going to show."
    "Maybe the king is making an appearance." I am starting to
understand Gordon's apprehension. I can't shake the sense that some-
thing is amiss.
    "It would be good PR for him, at the very least. But I don't
think that's what's going on. This organization may be run locally by
Swazis, but I wouldn't be surprised if they're merely local puppets for
some American group."
    The crowd noise begins to swell again, and the CIA-looking
guys get a little jumpy and start pulling out their radios and talking
frantically to one another.
    "I wish I could hear what they're saying." Gordon is looking past
the trucks and has a worried look on his face.
    "Stuart, look at that, down the road." Removed from the circus,
we can finally see down the road. I spot two expensive white Mercedes-
Benz vans bumping steadily toward us. They pull up behind the one
that arrived earlier.
    "Aid work must be good business." I whisper to Gordon. I raise
2 3 4 T o m Da v i s




my camera as a group of men wearing slick designer suits and black
silk ties emerge. Next come women dressed in business attire, each
wearing brightly colored scarves around their necks that float behind
them in the growing breeze.
    Gordon makes a note on his pad.
    The door opens on van number two, and out come
photographers and people with video cameras perched on their
shoulders like parrots. They take their places to capture the full
range of today's events.
    The security force escorts them down to a special platform in
front of the tables. It certainly looks impressive: huge trucks, signs,
important people in fancy clothes, video cameras and photographers,
and a bunch of starving Africans scratching in the dirt.
    Several of the official-looking men come down to the tables
and start handing out prepackaged gift baskets. Before the basket is
released into outstretched hands, a conveniently placed cameraman
has them pose for a picture. The shot is taken, and they are allowed
to walk away.
    More people filter into line. Now, there are hundreds of desperate,
hungry men, women, and children.
    The video cameras catch the entire escapade. A few suits come
out from behind the table and start to mingle with the people. They
shake hands, say something with a smile, and move on to the next
person. The video cameras keep rolling.
    Now there is no doubt in my mind that the Helping Hand
folks are here not merely for generosity's sake, but for a much more
nefarious purpose. I've never felt so much turmoil, watching these
people subjected to such a contrived handout.
Scared                                                            235




    Gordon is standing and shaking his head.
    "This is nothing short of ridiculous." We look on as a slick
GQ-type, wearing a thousand-dollar suit doles out a pittance to
someone who won't earn a thousand dollars in his whole life.
    The rest of the Mercedes-Benz contingent hand out baskets--
maybe twenty or so each, pausing for every photo opportunity
along the way. Then, suddenly, and without warning, the security
guards start gathering the suits and corralling them back toward
the vehicles. The men and women in fancy clothes wave, make one
more appearance on the podium, wave again, and head back to
their van. The door closes and they're gone--just like that.
    I look at Gordon. "Is this an aid mission or a political
campaign?"
    "Bizarre stuff, I tell you. I don't think I've ever seen anything so
wacky. But whatever it takes for these people to get food."
    Out come a dozen or so large duffle bags. Half of the security
guards start handing out small paper bags, each about the size of a
lunch bag.
    At the same time, the other goons and workers start loading the
supplies and tables back into the semis with the same cold efficiency
with which it was unloaded.
    One of the gift bags falls to the ground and the contents spill
out, revealing a pathetic array. I count among the supplies a tiny bag
of rice no larger than my hand, a packet of seasoning the size of a
quarter, a tea bag, and a bar of soap--and something that looks like
a Bible tract.
    Walter catches my eye. He looks like he's in ruins.
    I'm incensed. "Gordon, who are they? What are they doing?"
2 3 6 T o m Da v i s




The words spill out of my mouth. "This is immoral, ungodly--how
could they do something like this? That food is their only hope."
    "I know." Gordon begins to charge forward, and I follow,
snapping pictures along the way.
    "Excuse me, sir?" Gordon's face and ears are beet red.
    The suit stays calm and says in a measured voice, "Sorry, no
interviews, no questions."
    "Like hell I'm not going to ask question. My name is Gordon
Clandish, and I'm with the New York Times. What do you think
you're doing?"
    "No comment." A few more security guards start to wander
closer to us.
    "You can't say `No comment.' These people are starving, and
you've obviously brought plenty of provisions. But now you're
loading everything back into the truck? What in God's name is that
all about?" Gordon's voice is louder than I've ever heard it.
    "Many people have been affected by the flood, sir. Obligation
and care for them all compels us to move on. We've done what we
can do here." He says something to another suit and points toward
me. Then the second suit walks toward me.
    "Put your camera down," he says in a low, quiet voice. My
camera's not coming down.
    Gordon is following the first guy, getting in his face.
    "You've got to be kidding me. You know exactly what you've
done. Exploited these people, taken your crappy pictures and video
so you can raise more money in order to line your filthy pockets!"
    "Sir, step aside." It is a threat, not a request.
    "I won't step aside, you scum."
Scared                                                          237




    I continue to take pictures, backing away from the man who's
coming toward me. I think I'm about to get decked, when another of
the men, the apparent ringleader, calls out to him.
    "Come. Let's go now."
    They all turn at once toward their vans.
    Gordon shouts. "You can count on seeing this charade in the
New York Times!"
    "Have a nice day, sir," the driver says right before he closes his
door.
    "Burn in hell," Gordon says. But his words are drowned out by
the sounds of sixteen cylinders growling to life.
                  Chapter Twenty-five

The crowd at Walter's care point has scattered. Some have gone back
to their villages, but most have remained, sitting in groups. I am
amazed at how quickly the gogos collected all the paltry bags of rice
and pooled them to cook a meal for one day. The only meal for the
day once again.
    "Walter." Gordon puts his hand on his friend's shoulders. "We
are going to find some real help for you."
    I can tell Walter wants to believe this, but his words carry little
hope. He seems defeated, deflated.
    "Thank you, my friends. God bless you. Without help, I don't
know what we will do." He has aged fifteen years in one day.
    Gordon and I head back to the Land Cruiser.
    "Stuart, how much cash do you have?"
    "I have about $1,000; what are you thinking?"
    "Let's see, $610. We'll need to exchange yours into emalangeni."
    I look back at the care point as we pull away. There's hardly any
movement, except for the gogos watching over the pot and the steam
curling up into the sky.
    "Make sure that water boils good and long, Walter," Gordon had
told him, "or you'll all be sick."
    We drive away, dodging the rocks and clothes, sticks, tin cans,

                                     238
Scared                                                             239




and other rubbish that has surfaced from the roads now that the
ground is starting to dry out.
    "I've never been so angry." Gordon yanks the wheel to the right,
avoiding a dazed-looking chicken.
    The Helping Hand farce has stolen some of his optimism, but he
is determined to do something that matters.
    "There's a huge SPAR grocery store that will have everything we
need. We'll be there in about an hour. But we'll need to swing by my
place first and pick up a trailer. There's no way we'll get that much
food into the vehicle."
    Gordon is still steamed. He beats a hand on the steering wheel.
"Calculated, so exploitative. Imagine the lengths they went to,
driving those rigs all the way out here in this mess." The color has
risen once again in his face. "Because they are snakes, coming in the
name of our God. Wolves in sheep's clothing."
    I remember that phrase. Whitney used it once to describe the execs
at her previous network when she was told over a very nice dinner that
she'd been passed up for a promotion. "You're so good," they told her,
"we need you to stay right where you are." As Whitney tells it, she
nodded politely and smiled at her superiors, one not much older than
she. Then, after her shift that night, she told her boss, using her best
Southern manners, that she indeed was not going to stay "right where
she was" but would in fact, not be returning to their network with its
insipid executives and inferior ratings. Whitney almost never swears,
but, man, is she ever good at shooting steel arrows through her eyes
while speaking with a voice that is much too polite for the circumstance.
She hits you twice--first with the laserlike stare, then with pangs of
guilt for having wronged such a generous, unselfish woman.
2 4 0 T o m Da v i s




    I look over at Gordon, who is deep in his thoughts.
    "So are you thinking you can get this article together for the
Times tonight?"
    "We've clearly been spending too much time together, Stu. You
read my mind."
    I think about Adanna feeding those children at her house.
    "I have another element I want to add to the story, if you're okay
with it."
    "Yeah, what's that?" He shifts his eyes toward me for a second
and then back to the obstacle course ahead of us.
    "Adanna." That gets his attention.
    "Okay. I thought we might do that as a separate story ... but
what are you thinking?"
    "When I went to her house today, she had a circle of kids outside
her door and was feeding them all the food I gave to her--food that
was meant for her, Precious, and Abu. She used it all, Gordon. She
said, `They were here, so I fed them.'"
    Gordon chuckles. "You know, these Swazis think one day at a
time. Still, it's remarkable that a child her age would reach out like
that so unselfishly. Especially considering what she's been through
these past days."
    Days. Has it only been days? It feels like a dozen lifetimes.
    "Yeah, I felt like a heel. She thought I was mad at her for giving
the food away. Of course, I wasn't. I was just worried about her and
Precious and Abu."
    Gordon picks up Adanna's journal from the center floorboard
and hands it to me.
Scared                                                               241




    "Maybe we can use something from here in the article too. With
her permission, of course."
    I feel a little like I'm committing a white-collar crime, but I open
it to the first page and read.


       My memories of my father are few. My mother tells me he
       was an important man who had very big things to do. I do
       not know if that is true, but I do know he was gone all the
       time. My daddy was very good to me. He would take me
       fishing, and he brought home presents, little treats, from
       the city, food and even a pretty dress, white with pink
       flowers on it. But sometimes he would come home smelling
       of corn liquor and foul smoke, and do things to me that
       fathers do not do to their daughters, things you do not
       write about. Those times, I hated him. I wished him dead.
       And then he would come home after being gone, singing
       and bringing treats for us, treating me like his daughter
       again. Then I had two minds: I wanted the bad person to
       go, and I wanted my good daddy to stay. These are things
       I would never speak of, Frida. Never.


    Her precise writing covers every square inch of the page. Of
course, that makes sense. Adanna would understand the rare luxury
of paper. Nothing would be wasted.
    I come across a poem just a few pages later.


       In the darkest places of the night
       my soul, once so forlorn, is finally free.
2 4 2 T o m Da v i s




       For I have found a Love who is the Light;
       He gave my stolen virtue back to me.
       He walks with me though trials and troubles stay,
       And death and demons hover all around,
       But greater is the Love that dwells in me
       And fiercer is the Friend that I have found.
       I shall not fear the waning of the day,
       nor bear the shame of an evil father's whim
       The Sky-Maker illuminates my way.
       There is no guilty stain on me in Him.


    I finish reading and look up to the sky. The words float there
among the clouds and continue to speak to me. I wish I understood
what they were telling me.
    Gordon looks over at me. He says nothing.
    "Gordon, Adanna's writing is really powerful. I mean, you're the
writer. What do you think?"
    He smiles. "Writer or not, I think you know when words have
power. Yes, her thoughts, and the way she communicates them, are
astounding. Well beyond her years."
    "What do you think? Could we include some of her words? Is
that too strange? I think we should lean on Bill to have it printed
tomorrow. Front page."
    Gordon laughs out loud for the first time all day. "Oh, Lord
have mercy. He's so U.S. politico-centric. Should be working for the
Washington Post, if you ask me."
    I think back to the lunch I had with Bill when I got this assignment.
"Yeah, his middle name is `Party Line,' but what have we got to lose?"
Scared                                                              243




    Gordon is slowing down for a turn that brings us toward town.
We pull up in front of a store that thankfully does look like an old
Safeway. I'm shocked that this thing is actually sitting in the middle
of a country that's starving to death. The parking lot is packed.
    "This is not good." Gordon's eyes dart back and forth, surveying
the scene.
    The store is overrun with people running up and down the isles.
Women and children are carrying out boxes of water and food. Their
arms are stuffed with as much as they can hold.
    Gordon runs his fingers through his hair, and flecks of mud float
off and settle on his lap and around the car. His eyes are bloodshot.
    "This is why it's so tough getting aid to people who are living in
the country. Fear drives the middle class to clean the stores out of
everything, leaving nothing for the ones who need it most. It's plain
selfish hoarding."
    "I've seen this disconnect between the haves and have-nots in
other countries. Without infrastructure, the poor are out of luck.
What do you think we should do?" I know that's the only question
for Gordon right now.
    "I see only one more option." He's already pulling out of the lot.
"If we try any of the other stores around here, I'm afraid the result
will be the same. We'll head to Mbabane and pray there is something
left. Since Mbabane is above the flood zones, it probably hasn't been
affected like the lower areas."
    "Then let's hurry. Time is wasting."


We arrive in Mbabane late. Too late to make it back to the village
tonight. We'll have to stay here overnight.
2 4 4 T o m Da v i s




    "The SPAR is there on the right." Gordon points and the car
stops with a lurch.
    "The parking lot looks quiet. Hopefully, that doesn't mean the
shelves are already empty."
    I walk into the store with a twinge of nervousness. I am elated
to see that it is well stocked. It's obvious that there has been a small
rush, but nothing like in the city of Manzini.
    Gordon takes control, clapping his hands together. "Okay, let's
try to come as close as we can to $1,600. Stuart, you round up $1,000
worth of water and I'll spend the rest on food."
    "Sounds good. See you at the front."
    I go straight to the manager. That's a ton of water, likely over
two thousand bottles. I walk up to a man I presume is in charge.
He's one of the few older men I've seen. This gray-haired Swazi
is big, but not fat, and carries his body with a slow, controlled
confidence. He is wearing glasses that do little to hide the deep
crows feet around his eyes. The glasses look like a 1950s army issue.
He has a military air.
    "Hello, are you the manager?"
    "I am, in fact. How may I help you?" I can tell he is sizing me
up--scrawny American, worn jeans and T-shirt, dirty matted hair.
    "We need to buy $1,000 worth of water, the biggest bottles
possible for the best price."
    He looks at me like I've just escaped from a Swazi asylum.
    "Sorry, I can't help you."
    "What do you mean you can't help me? I have money, and I am
desperate."
    "What do you know about desperate?" He laughs. I don't flinch.
Scared                                                            245




I have learned a lot about desperation lately. He continues the
interrogation. "Okay, then. Tell me: Who are you with?"
    "With? My friend and I are with the New York Times. I'm
a photographer. We're doing a series of stories on your people." I
emphasize the last two words. "On the plight of Swazi people."
    "Nope. I can't help you." He starts to turn away, and I realize
this is going to take some careful work on my part. I slow my words,
trying to empty them of emotion.
    "Sir, we are trying to help a village that has no drinkable water
because of the flood. We're involved in a relief effort to help them.
Sir, my friend is in your store right now getting food for us to take
there in the morning."
    He squeezes his lips together and shifts his mouth back and
forth. "So, what you're telling me is that this is all going to help the
people here in our country?"
    "Yes, absolutely."
    "Do you mean our people in the villages? Swazis?"
    He looks over the black-rimmed glasses, now resting on the tip
of his nose. He gives me an "I want to believe you" look but is still
unconvinced. Maybe a Helping Hand contingent was already here.
    "Sir, I promise. Look at me; I'm filthy from trying to help."
    He laughs. "I saw you pull up. You and your friend are the
dirtiest people to come in here all day--and the dirtiest white people
I've ever seen." He pauses. "Okay. I will choose to believe you. How
many bottles did you say you need?"
    "A thousand dollars worth."
    Gordon appears from down the aisle with two enormous
pushcarts, each stacked high with fifty and hundred kilogram bags
2 4 6 T o m Da v i s




of rice, beans, and corn. No need to pick up any extras. This is about
bare necessities.
    Within the hour, the trailer and car are loaded. The sunlight is
gone, and the care point is at least an hour and a half away.
    We jump back in the car and start to pull away. I can hear a faint
news report coming from the radio. I crank up the volume.
    "Swazi Radio AM 1060--the only station in Swaziland. The
flooding throughout the region has been extensive. It is believed
there are over twenty thousand dead and a hundred thousand
displaced and in need of food and clean water. The death toll may
rise as further reports surface."
    "This is horrendous," I say to myself. To Gordon. And maybe
to God.
    "I can't help but think of what will happen to all the children."
    "It breaks my heart, Gordon."
    "I need to tell you something. The thought has crossed my mind
a hundred times, and I have to tell somebody."
    "Tell me, Gordon."
    "I've considered adopting Adanna, Precious, and Abu."
    "What? That's incredible! I can't think of a better parent. Can
you do that?"
    "I can. Because I've been living in Swaziland for over a year, I
would meet the criteria of an adoptive parent."
    "Gordon, you'd be making such a difference in their lives. You'd
give them a family forever, a father, safety, security, a future."
    "I'm only one man, but it's something I can do to make a real
difference. Remember what I told you about not losing the big
picture?"
Scared                                                            247




    "Of course."
    "Well, what we've got trailing behind us? What we're doing
with these articles? That's big-picture stuff. Important stuff. But
Adanna ..."
    The next words catch in his throat. "Adanna and Precious and
Abu, they're my small picture."
    As he speaks, I imagine the four of them standing together for a
photo. I snap the mental picture, and it brings a smile.
    "I just love them all so much," he says. "Adanna has been a
mother all her life. I want to take that pressure off, love her, and let
her be a child again."
    "I told you before, and I'll say it again."
    Gordon has a smile on his face from ear to ear, and his eyes are
starting to water.
    "Okay, go ahead. Say it."
    "You're a saint, man."
           Chapter Twenty-six

Gordon Clandish--Special to the Times


Matsapha, Swaziland, Feb. 16--Three days after intense
rainfall led to flooding in southern Manzini, thousands
of people are left without food or clean water. Most are
children under the age of 12. Nearly 25 percent are heads
of households, having lost parents or other caregivers to
AIDS.
   The government of Swaziland says it has no need of
international aid, but the only relief to come from within
the country came in the form of wolves in sheep's clothing.
   Earlier today, two semis from the Swazi aid organization
A Helping Hand made their way down muddy roads to
the Thembini Care Point, run by Pastor Walter Malaza.
Hundreds from the community had come to take refuge on
this higher ground in hopes of finding food and water.
   Flood victims jumped and cheered as representatives
from A Helping Hand unloaded large containers of food,
water, and sanitation supplies. A second and third wave
of vehicles pulled up to the care point, and organization
officials stepped out and onto a platform where people had


                           248
Scared                                                                249




   been organized into lines to receive aid. The officials, who
   appeared dressed for a political convention, handed small
   brown paper bags to villagers while hired photographers
   took photos.
      Each bag contained a small amount of rice, a seasoning
   packet, a tea bag, a bar of soap, and a religious pamphlet,
   barely enough for one meal.
      Officials from A Helping Hand distributed the paper
   bags, then drove off in their Mercedes vans, and the rest of the
   relief crew loaded the rest of the needed supplies, including
   filtered water, back into the semis and retreated from the
   scene.
      Relief workers would give no comment about their
   unusual distribution methods or motivation.
      A disheartened Malaza said, "We were herded like goats
   with the promise of help, only to be forsaken by our own
   people."
      A United Nations resident coordinator for Swaziland,
   Mncobi Msibi, said in a telephone interview from Mbabane
   that he had never heard of A Helping Hand.
      "Refugees are short of clean water, food, and shelter, but
   the situation remains under control," Msibi said.
      For the time being, government officials have declined
   offers of more extensive aid.
      Just one kilometer away, another scene stood in contrast
   to that at the care point. A twelve-year-old Swazi girl, a
   resident of Thembini, had more than a dozen local orphaned
   children seated outside her hut, doling out every bit of food
2 5 0 T o m Da v i s




  and water she had in her home.
     This young girl, Adanna Dlamini, had been given food
  for herself and her two younger siblings by a U.S. visitor a
  few days earlier. When asked why she didn't save it to take
  care of her own family, she answered, "These children are
  here, and they are hungry. Why would I not feed them?"
     Adanna and her siblings, ages five and two, lost their
  mother recently to complications of AIDS. Her mother had
  been infected with HIV by her husband, who left the family
  four years ago and is presumed dead. Adanna is one of
  thousands of vulnerable orphans in this area, alone, ignored
  by some relatives and community members, and often
  suffering egregious abuse at the hands of others.
     This is a familiar story throughout Africa. In the absence
  of a competent medical system and the antiretroviral
  medicines, thousands of children watch their parents
  die from AIDS. The AIDS crisis in the United States, by
  contrast, is more under control. Today, Americans are more
  likely to commit suicide than die from AIDS.
     This frail young girl, looking more like an eight-year-
  old than a preteen, has every reason to despair, but even
  after personal tragedy and a natural disaster that has swept
  her community, killing thousands, she remains open to
  bestowing good. Open to hope.
     Adanna is not only a relief worker but also a writer of
  uncommon talent and perspective. The pages of a journal,
  given to her by a Finnish teacher of writing, are filled front
  and back with her words.
Scared                                              251




                        M y C ountry
   Today the violet bird came to me
   in the half light,
   when the sun and moon
   nod to one another across the same plane
   Then arc!
   One to greet day, the other night.


   Bird of my country past
   You swoop and search the ground.


   I believed you my own,
   When Momma gave me an offering
   From her pot to scatter along the path
   I let corn slip through my hands,
   Which you found with your regal beak.


   Bird of Swaziland,
   Your bead black eyes search my soul.


   Understand: I no longer draw water
   From a river swallowed by earth
   I have no maize, from this scorched land.


   Bird of Sorrow--
   Only crumbs of dry earth fall through my hands
2 5 2 T o m Da v i s




  Which ache for the pail of water
  The feel of corn
  The touch of my mother
  Her voice, like a morning bird, saying
  Sawubona, my child. Greet a new day!
               Chapter Twenty-seven

As we drive out of the hotel complex on the way to Walter's, it's clear
that something has shifted. Everyone is moving, working to clean up,
but as they look at our passing car, their eyes are empty. They reach
outward with their hands when they see what we're carrying in the
trailer. As we near the care point, we pass two boys wearing ragged
shorts. I look in the passenger mirror to see them running after us.
    "Are you seeing this?" I turn toward Gordon.
    "Yes. An all-too-familiar sight. You know, if we stopped ..."
    "We'd be overrun. We'd never make it." I look again, and the
boys have stopped, bent and panting. I have a rock in the pit of my
stomach.
    As we near Walter's care point, the children recognize us, waving
enthusiastically as if we were some kind of Swazi rock star, and run
alongside the trailer.
    "We're like the pied piper." Gordon's eyes are darting back and
forth, trying to avoid the crowd. He's tense. I roll down the window
and try to wave the people back.
    As we arrive at the care point, a baptism occurs. They see food
and pass from death to life. The expressions on their faces, their body
language, hand movements all change.
    The gogos, standing motionless, jump to their feet, clapping

                                253
2 5 4 T o m Da v i s




their hands and lifting them to the sky. Their joy is contagious, and
Gordon and I both laugh out loud.
    The noise draws more people, and before the dust has settled in
front of us, we are surrounded. The door is jammed shut because we
are pressed in from all sides
    People clamber and bang on the truck. For a few seconds, I'm
afraid. They're grabbing at the packages on the trailer. Never have I
seen such a hopeful panic.
    "Gordon, what do we do?"
    "Try praying."
    Slowly and cautiously, I roll down the window.
    "Please ... move away from the truck. We're trying to help
you."
    Hands fly into the cab looking like a hundred worms wiggling
through the air, groping and grasping. 
    "Roll up the window now!"
    "I can't, they won't get their hands out."
    "Roll it up, and they'll move their hands."
    The vehicle is starting to rock ever so slightly back and forth.
    "They've gone mad."
    "Not mad, just desperate."
    "Gordon, look. They're ripping into the bags on the trailer."
    "Okay, when I say go, open the door and push as hard as you
can. We'll plow our way through and try to get this under control."
    "I'm not sure that's such a good ..."
    "Just do it. One, two ..."
    A high-pitched, ear-piercing crack whistles through the air, then
another. The people scatter like ants, taking cover away from the
Scared                                                            255




vehicle. Some fall to the ground, others cower under trees with their
hands over their ears.
    "What was that?"
    "No clue."
    "Wait ... there's the answer. Look."
    A man stands with a rifle pointed in the air. He's yelling something
in S'swati, and though I don't understand a word of that language, I
can tell everyone is doing exactly as he says.
    "That's Chief Bhulu. Thank God."
    "What is he doing?"
    "He's shooting in the air to control the crowd. These people are
afraid of guns."
    "Yeah, me, too."
    He's coming this way, and Walter's right behind him. The chief
waves his hand, holding the rifle, and the remaining crowd parts like
the Red Sea. We climb out of the Land Cruiser. The chief is speaking
rapidly in S'swati.
    "The chief says he is deeply sorry for the behavior of his people."
    He shouts loudly at them again, and Walter continues to interpret.
    "We are not animals! No matter how much we suffer, we bind
together as one." Turning back to us, the chief continues.
    "They don't know any better. When you are in precarious
circumstances, as we have found ourselves in these last few days,
people forget themselves in their push to survive."
    Gordon speaks. "Chief Bhulu, it is my honor to see you again.
We understand. I'm sure we would have acted the same had we been
in a similar circumstance. We are here to help with provisions. It's
not much, but it will help until more assistance arrives."
2 5 6 T o m Da v i s




    Walter's eyes are wet with tears. He lets the chief do the talking,
jumping in only to offer interpretation. I nod toward him, and he
puts his hands together, as if in a prayer, then waves them forward
toward me, a supreme gesture of gratitude.
    Chief Bhulu's voice is loud and clear. "My brothers, please accept
our gratitude for this sacrifice. You will be safe here. You have my
word."
    The crowd creeps toward the chief, cautiously, as if he might
turn and smite them at a moment's notice.
    "We appreciate your hospitality. Gordon, let's get these things
to the people."
    A giant smile crosses Walter's face, the kind you would give
to a close friend you haven't seen in years. Then, he bull-rushes
me with his arms wide open and practically suffocates me with an
embrace.
    "Thank you, thank you, Stuart, for not forgetting us."
    "We're just doing what we can. What is right."
    He steps back, then puts his hand on my shoulder. He says
quietly, "Brother, you are God's vessel. You, my brother, are the
hands and feet of Christ, the hope of Christ to the people."
    We head back to the trailer, where the chief has begun to assemble
villagers to help unload the goods.


The process of serving all these hungry people runs smoothly, thanks
to the leadership of Walter and the chief. People line up, as they
did for the not-so-helpful Helping Hand caravan; children first, the
elderly, women, then the men.
    Walter steps onto a rock and calls out to the crowd, "Let us
Scared                                                            257




pray." Out of reverence, respect for Walter, or fear of the armed chief
at Walter's side, everyone quiets down and turns toward him.
    Walter's powerful voice--inflection and intonation perfected by
years of preaching--carries across the crowd like a mighty wind.
    "Gracious God, thank You for remembering Your people...."
    Voices rise out of the crowd, "Yes, Jesus. Mmm-hmm. Yes, Father."
    "Bless the servants who brought this food. And may our govern-
ment do what is right and continue to provide help for all who need
it here in our country. God, remember us, Your people. Amen."
    Walter and the chief usher Gordon and me to the front, where
the supplies are stationed. Gordon immediately dives in to help,
passing out food and a toothy smile as rich as I've ever seen from his
face.
    "I'll be back in just a minute ..." I say, then turn toward the car.
Before I have gone two steps, Gordon calls after me.
    "Getting your camera?"
    "Yes. I thought maybe ..."
    Gordon holds his hands out in front of him, indicating the
crowd. "I don't think this is a news story, Gordon."
    "But it's good news. It's the best sort of news. I thought if maybe
I got some photos ..."
    "Stuart, do you hear that voice?"
    I look around, puzzled.
    "I hear lots of voices, Gordon. What do you mean?"
    "Listen closer ..."
    I strain to hear, then shrug my shoulders.
    "Listen, Stuart ... listen...."
    And suddenly I hear it. The voice from so many years ago. The
2 5 8 T o m Da v i s




same voice I heard in the church service. And in hearing it, I am
finally changed.
    Feed my sheep.
    I walk back and stand next to Gordon. He sees it too--in my eyes.
The people who come to me are the same needy, hungry people they
were five minutes ago. They still wear the same torn, worn clothes and
carry the same broken bowls. But they are no longer strangers.
    I look to my right and see Adanna, trailed by Precious and
Abu. Precious jumps up and down again and again, vying for my
attention, until I wave. I see Abu's little hand waving at me, and my
heart clinches. Adanna gives me a smile, but it is two smiles. One,
the smile of a happy child; the other, the smile of someone who is
thankful for a good friend.
    Gordon bends toward her and puts his hand on her slender shoulder.
He is saying something I can't hear. Then he turns toward me.
    "Stuart, Adanna's journal is still in the Land Cruiser. Don't let
me forget."
    I nod.
    After the last person has been served, I help carry the remaining
supplies into the church building. Then I head to the car to get
Adanna's book.
    It has already been a long day, but I am not tired.


Adanna sits under the trees with Gordon. Walter and the gogos are
busying themselves with preparation for another wave of hungry
locals we have been told are just minutes away.
    Children are running around, playing tag or chase or some
other game only children play, their laughter and yelps dotting the
Scared                                                           259




afternoon with joy as delicious as the meal they have just enjoyed.
Women sit in circles, chatting away. Nearby, a group of men is also
engaged in a lively discussion. I am reminded of a time when Whitney
and I visited her family in South Carolina. Neighbors would stop by
the sprawling front porch "to jaw," as Whitney's dad would say. At
the time, I thought the potluck chatter was silly, a throwback to
a time that no longer existed and served little purpose. Certainly
it was something I had never known. I teased Whitney about the
"small-town small talk" for months afterward. She always smiled and
never once told me I was being inappropriate. But now, as I sit here
and watch the people talk with one another in a language I don't
understand, I realize just how wrong I was.
    The smell of fresh wood permeates the air, and our clothes smell
like we've been standing in front of a barbecue all day. This is one of
the good smells of Africa.
    Gordon is leaning back on his elbow, mouth wide open, laughing
with the women.
    I sit down next to Adanna and hand her the journal.
    "You left this in Gordon's car. It's a beautiful book."
    "Thank you, Stuart. Frida ... I mean this book ... is precious to
me." Precious looks over at us when she hears her name and smiles.
I wave to her, but she has already turned away and is chasing other
children and giggling. Abu is doing his best to follow her.
    Adanna folds her hands in front of her dirty dress, turns her head,
and rests her chin on her shoulder. Her skin and hair are flecked with
light brown spots, her eyes sallow looking. She starts to cough, and it
goes on for so long I wonder if it will ever stop.
    "Are you all right?"
2 6 0 T o m Da v i s




    She holds up her hand, finishes a cough, then says, "I am fine."
    I am not convinced, but her smile does its best at scaring away
my worry. It will be so good for her if Gordon can adopt them.
    "I have something to tell you," I say, "and I hope you're not upset
with Gordon and me."
    "What?"
    "We read your journal. We read `Frida.'"
    I can't read her expression.
    "You are such a beautiful writer. And ... well ... we should have
asked you first ... and by not doing so we broke a very important rule
in journalism ... but we included one of your poems in a newspaper
article he wrote. I hope you will forgive us."
    "It's okay." She sits with her legs tucked under her dress, her chin
on her knees, and closes her eyes. I put my hand on her back and
without a second thought, offer a silent prayer, God, bless this child.
    Precious and Abu run up and tug on Adanna's dress.
    "Play with us. Play with us 'Danna!" No wonder Adanna is so
tired. I am jarred by the sound of Gordon's satellite phone.
    "Hello?" Gordon says. He covers the phone. "It's Bill."
    I can hear Bill's sonorous voice as if he were sitting with us.
    "Gordon, I got the article and Stuart's photos."
    "Great, Bill. We're with the people in the village right now."
    "Stuart's there? Let me talk to him."
    Gordon hands me the phone.
    "Hey, Bill."
    "Stuart, I have to tell you: You're back, man. The photos you
sent are spectacular, and you know I don't use that word a lot. What's
gotten into you? And the photo of the girl?"
Scared                                                            261




    "Adanna." She opens her eyes and picks up her head.
    "Yes. You got your front page." I can feel my face get hot. Gordon's
mouth is agape.
    Bill continues, "Great work, Stuart. And the article will be on
the front of the International section. Those Helping Hand bastards
even got my cold blood boiling."
    "Thanks, Bill. This is great news."
    Gordon slaps me on the back.
    "What does this mean?" Adanna asks Gordon.
    "It means the world will see your goodness, Adanna."
    I turn to her. "Remember the photo I took outside your home,
when you were feeding the kids?"
    She nods.
    "It will be on the front page of the newspaper tomorrow morning,
Sunday's edition. Many, many people will read it."
    Gordon adds, "And the story about you and your poem will also
appear in the newspaper."
    "Which poem?" she asks. Gordon and I shoot each other a look
of panic. Did we make a mistake?
    "`My Country,'" answers Gordon. We look at her, searching her
face and seeking approval.
    Her shoulders drop. "Oh, good."
    I feel like weeping, looking at her.
    "Adanna, you are going to be a famous poet."
    "And your people will get recognition, maybe even more help,
because of you." When Gordon says this, Adanna's head jerks up
with a start. A strange look crosses her face.
    Walter leans over and kisses her forehead like a proud father.
2 6 2 T o m Da v i s




The gogos follow, hugging her small body. She looks happy. For the
moment, we all have reason to be happy.
    A few minutes later, Gordon gets up and walks Adanna, Precious,
and Abu back to their hut. When he returns, the sun is beginning to
disappear behind the hills, and activity has waned in the care point.
He looks concerned.
    "Adanna is completely exhausted. And she's been coughing a lot.
Have you noticed she's been coughing? I'd like to get a doctor out to
take a look at her. I tried to get her to come back with us tonight, but
she insisted on going back home with Precious and Abu. Who can
blame her for wanting to be in her own place."
    "Gordon, why don't we stay here tonight? Then we could be
close to Adanna and also be ready to help in the morning. Walter
said they are going to need more help tomorrow."
    Walter walks toward us. He is weary but at peace.
    "We want to stay here tonight," Gordon says, "so we can help
you in the morning. And to tell you the truth, I wouldn't mind
staying close to Adanna."
    A shadow passes over Walter's face. "Yes, we will have to keep
watch on that child. Have you told Stuart of your plan to become a
dad again?" Walter's eyes brighten.
    "He has," I say, patting Gordon on the back, "and it's the best
thing I've heard in years."
    Gordon turns to Walter. "You know, Stuart is going to be a
dad too."
    "I am!" I'm surprised by my excitement.
    "Really? Congratulations. Oh, Stuart, you are going to make a
really good father. God bless you and your wife."
Scared                                                           263




    "Thank you, Walter."
    Walter starts back toward the church and motions for us to
follow. The two men in front of me have taught me more about
how to care, how to act like a true father, than anyone else.
    "If you want to stay tonight, I would be grateful. Why don't you
stay here in the church? We don't have much for beds, but it will be
more comfortable and might keep you safe from--" He stops. "Well,
whatever might be prowling around at night."


Gordon and I lie on mats in a closed-in porch. We can still see outside
through the torn screens and open windows. There are dozens of
others lining the floor along with us, obviously displaced from the
flood. They don't seem to mind a bit that we are here.
    Darkness transforms the yellow grassy hillsides into gray layers,
the outer edges of a black hole.
    "How are you feeling about the front-page photo?" he asks. "You
seemed a little less excited than I thought you'd be. Front page is big
news, Stuart."
    "Yes, I know it is. And of course I think it's great."
    "But ..."
    "Does it seem exploitative to you?"
    "Ah ... I wondered when you'd get to that question. What do
you think, Stu?"
    "Well, when I think about the photo I took of the people
slaughtered in the DRC, the one that won me that stupid award, I
wonder if I'm as bad as those phonies from A Helping Hand."
    "Maybe we don't always have good motives for what we do...."
    "Yeah...."
2 6 4 T o m Da v i s




    "But I don't doubt that, ultimately, you are a good man with a
good heart. And maybe in the past you weren't--or maybe you just
didn't see it. But you are a different man from the Stuart who met
me at the hotel when we started this story. Swaziland has changed
you. This is what happened to me after I lost my family. Showing our
Adanna feeding those children, what could be more good than that?"
    "Maybe you're right. It is a difficult line to walk. I want to do
the right thing--far more than I want to make a name for myself.
That might not always have been the case, but I am sure of it now. It's
big-picture stuff, isn't it? That's where the good will come. Right?"
    "Yes, big-picture stuff."
    In the dimming light, I can just make out tears forming in
Gordon's eyes.
    "Gordon, thank you."
    "Thank me? For what?"
    "For everything. For walking through the muck with me. For
being a friend. For challenging me. And ... maybe most of all ... for
what you're doing for Adanna and Precious and Abu. They are three
very lucky children." And now I'm choked up too.
    We are silent together. In a matter of minutes, I can hear Gordon
snoring softly. I've never been one to find sleep so easily.
    It has been a good day. A life-changing day. And yet, a feeling of
despair settles on me. I shiver and lie under my blanket. I watch as
the last rays emanating from the sun are extinguished like a multitude
of candles.
    I miss Whitney.
    And my unborn child.
                   Chapter Twenty-eight

The night passes without incident, though I awake exhausted. I look
around the room; Gordon must've slipped out earlier.
     The morning brings new anxiety. What do you do in a catastrophe
zone? I know what to do when I'm behind my camera, but without
it? I feel lost.
     Walter walks into the room, far more cheerful than anyone ought
to be this early in the morning.
     "Stuart, good morning. How did you sleep?"
     "Oh, fine, thanks." He can see right through my lie but doesn't
offer a challenge.
     "Come and have some tea." I follow him out into courtyard. The
sun is shining faintly through the clouds.
     "I have a very important job for you. It is not a pretty job but a
necessary one. You still want to help?"
     "Yes, anything, Walter."
     "We need help digging graves for the people who lost their lives
in the flood. There are already several men working on it, but it is
not enough."
     I gather up my tired reserves, trying to make certain I don't reveal
my real feelings about his request. Did he see me flinch?
     "Give me a shovel, and show me where to go."

                                   265
2 6 6 T o m Da v i s




    Even as I agree, my stomach twists into knot.
    Walter leads me to the gogos, where I sip tea and eat a small bit
of pap. I am miles away--both literally and figuratively--from my
morning Starbucks coffee and maple-nut scone.
    Walter hands me a shovel and offers a look of sympathy. But
he has other concerns. With a flick of his hand, he points me in
the right direction. I walk down a muddy bank to where rows of
graves have already been dug. Bodies are lined up just beyond the
graves.
    I would guess there are at least three hundred people awaiting
their final resting places. I can't help but wonder if it's wise burying
the dead next to a river. But so many are buried here already. My
place in line is decided for me. The man next to me looks up and
gives me a manly nod. There's no script for this.
    The shovel breaks the ground easily, like a knife cutting through
soft cheese. The ground is saturated. I shovel and toss, shovel and
toss. I'm living in the sharp land of necessity now. I am doing
something with my hands to honor the dead and the living. It seems
so inadequate. So incomplete. I fall into rhythm with strangers who
are burying sons, daughters, mothers, and fathers. The sound of
shovels cutting earth forms a strange symphony.
    Clouds cover the afternoon sun, a welcome respite from the heat.
After a couple of hours, I stop. My back hurts ... but I am surprised
at how quickly my wound has begun to heal. I would be stuck in my
bed, whining for chicken soup if I'd hurt myself back home.
    I decide to make my way back up to the care point, to take a
break and check in with Gordon. I look behind me as I make my
way up the hill: Eight neat graves for eight bodies. As I crest the hill,
Scared                                                           267




I see Gordon talking with a doctor. It's the black American doctor
from the hospital.
    "Hey, Gordon. Dr. Smith, how are you?"
    "Hello, Stuart. I should ask how that back of yours is."
    "Oh, it's fine."
    "Let me see it."
    I pull my shirt up and it tears slightly against the scab.
    "Hey. It's looking surprisingly good. Are you still taking the
antibiotics I gave you?"
    "Uh, yeah ... no ..." I really haven't had time to think about it.
    "Well, I suggest you do. Just to prevent infection."
    "Yes, Doc.
                Chapter Twenty-nine

432 234
    Adanna

The first light of morning streams into the hut, and I push myself up
and out of bed. Precious and Abu lie sleeping on their beds. I make
my way to the door to walk down the path that leads to everywhere.
    I am very tired. Coughing kept me awake, but I want to feel
the morning sun on my back. It is a comfort to walk the path my
momma did every morning. I miss her today with a deep ache. I walk
with slow steps, and the cloud-muted sun falls on my shoulders.
    My legs are weak, so I pause to sit on the large rock where I often
would sit and write or wait for my daddy to come home when I was
very young. My legs look like small brittle sticks. It is suddenly hard
to take in a breath, and I am afraid.
    A shadow falls on the path. I turn to find a stranger. He walks
toward me. Lost in my daydreaming, I didn't even hear him.
    "You look like you're in deep thought. Mind if I sit with you?"
    Startled but not scared, I tell him it is okay. He sits beside me.
    "Where did you come from?" I ask.
    His skin is dark but his eyes are a deep ocean blue.
    Studying his face I ask again, "Where is your home?"
    He laughs. "My home is another place." He pauses. "As is yours."
His voice is musical and soothing.

                                 268
Scared                                                            269




    "No," I tell him, "my home is not far. Just up the path. I was
born by that jacaranda tree, and I have lived here ever since."
    "This is not your true home, Adanna."
    "How do you know my name?"
    "I have known about you a long time."
    This man is strange indeed.
    "Someone who knows you well sent me."
    I wonder if he is a friend of Mr. Gordon or Pastor Walter.
    A flock of geese flies high over our heads and honk loudly. They
are heading somewhere important. Tagoze told me once that the one
leading the flock is cutting the wind for the others so they can rest
until it is their turn. How I miss him.
    I begin to cough and the man reaches over to place his hand on
my shoulder. Immediately, the coughing stops.
    "I am here to tell you, you were placed here for a time such as
this. You have used your gift well, Adanna, to help your people."
    His words remind me of someone, but I cannot remember. I am
so weary, so tired and weak I can hardly hold up my head. My breaths
seem to stop short in my throat and then I suddenly understand.
    "The illuminated man ..." I say. He smiles.
    "It is time for you to come home, sweet girl."
    "Who will take care of Precious and Abu?" My words fall out
like the last drips of water from an empty cup.
    "The Father has appointed someone to take care of them. They
will be treated with kindness and love."
    I nod. I close my eyes for a moment.
    "Thank you," I say, but when I look up, he is gone.
    I stumble home and crawl onto my bed. Precious and Abu are
2 7 0 T o m Da v i s




still asleep. I pick up Frida and lie on my side, facing the wall like
always, and find just enough strength to write.


My breath is shallow, and it rattles in rasps and wheezes, but I no
longer feel any pain. My body feels light. My eyelids are rocks. I
cannot keep them open.
    "Adanna?"
    I know this voice, like a mighty river.
    A familiar smell surrounds me, like the most fragrant flower in
the world.
    My eyes are closed, but I can see him--the illuminated man. I sit
up, lifted by a strength I did not know I had. He extends his hand,
and I see my name written on it. The A is the exact same kind I make
when I sign my name.
    "Adanna, you are my daughter. I love you and am well pleased
with you."
    His words cut to my heart. This has been the desire of my soul,
to be loved as a true daughter. I look at him and feel his love. Words
I've never spoken come from my mouth. "Holy are you, illuminated
man, giver of gifts, and lover of my soul."
    He tilts my face up, and I look deeply into his eyes. There I
see her face, her body now beautiful in a magnificent flowing robe,
glowing with the colors of a thousand suns.
    "Welcome home."
    I run to her arms, open for me.
    "Momma?"
                      Chapter Thirty

In short order, a line has formed, and Dr. Smith is put to work at
the care point. Gordon stands next to him, helping with translation.
He looks a little anxious, but I know his heart well now. He will not
deny these children care just to rush out to Adanna's side.
    I lean against a tree at the edge of the care point and sip some
water. Gogos diligently sweep the area with brooms made of twigs.
It looks to me like they are merely rearranging the dirt but they are
doing so with great purpose and dignity.
    Kids are kicking a soccer ball back and forth near the graves. It
is a surreal picture, these children at play surrounded by death and
destruction. The ball is kicked hard, and it flies into the air, drawing
a shallow arc that matches the shape of the dirt mounds beyond. I do
not need my camera to remember this image.
    I decide to head to Adanna's house--to tell her about Dr.
Smith--that he is here to help her.
    Along the trail, I am stopped by the surprising discovery
of tiny flowers. They are a dazzling dark blue with small white
centers. Something long since forgotten floods back to my
memory. I know this flower. My grandmother taught me all about
flowers. This was one of my favorites: the African blue squill.
They are only a few inches high and look like a blue spike of

                                 271
2 7 2 T o m Da v i s




nettles, but I know Adanna will love them. I gather up a few into
a small bouquet.
    As I continue along the path, I see two figures coming toward
me: Precious and Abu.
    "Hi, you two!" I yell ahead. They run to me, and I bend down to
hug them. "Where's your sister?"
    "She's resting," Precious says. "She isn't feeling well, I think."
    "Why don't you two head to the care point. There's a nice
American doctor there who is giving people checkups. Mr. Gordon
will bring him to check on Adanna soon too."
    "Okay, Mr. Stuart." I watch the two of them walk slowly down
the path, hand in hand.
    I approach the house and lightly tap on the door.
    "Adanna? Are you awake?"
    Nothing. I knock harder.
    "Adanna? Hey it's Mr. Stuart. I've brought you something."
    Peering inside, I see Adanna lying on her bed. I open the door
and walk slowly toward her.
    "Adanna."
    She doesn't respond. I carefully place my hand on her shoulder
and give it a light shake. I break into a cold sweat.
    Her skin is like ice.
    "God, no! Not her. Please, not her."
    "Adanna ..." I say again, softly at first. Then louder. Nothing but
silence. I kneel down and look around at her face.
    Her eyes are closed, and there's a look of tranquility. I kiss her
cold forehead, then gather Adanna's small body in my arms, holding
her close. I carry her down the path toward the care point. Gordon
Scared                                                              273




is walking toward me, followed by Precious and Abu. When he sees
me, he breaks into a run. My stomach goes sour, and everything
along the path blurs into a haze.
    "What's wrong? What's wrong with Adanna ...?"
    I have no words.
    He reaches us, and I gently place her in his arms.
    "No ... no ..." Gordon falls to his knees, his words trailing off
into silent sobs.
    Gordon buries her in his chest and wails a cry of deep loss.
    He suddenly stands and starts running back to the care point,
Adanna flopping in his arms. I want to follow, but I can't. I am frozen,
numb. Something compels me back to her hut. I walk inside and notice
the blue flowers scattered along the floor. Then I see her journal. I pick
it up and open it to the last page. Her penmanship is shaky. It looks as
if an old woman has written the entry. In the dim light, I read.


       A strange man came to me on the path,
       Kind with a voice like music
       Like a friend. He told me this isn't my home.
       I was not scared.
       I have come to you day and night
       Telling you things deep in my heart.
       My sadness and joy.


       The stranger with blue eyes like the sky said I had
       done my work.
       It is okay to go, the Father has appointed someone to
       take care of my Precious and Abu. I will miss them so.
2 7 4 T o m Da v i s




       My breathing is slow, my body light, like air.
       Today, I will go to the home of my ancestors.
       My real home.
       I am not scared.


    I put the book in my back pocket and step outside. I feel detached
from myself, unable to feel. I look over at a tree near her house and
see a shovel. It's the shovel I was using to dig graves earlier. I don't
even remember carrying it with me to Adanna's house.
    It is then that the floodgates finally open. I cry as I have never
cried before.
    And then I start to dig.


Some time later, a procession comes down the path. Walter is leading
the solemn march. He is holding Precious's hand, and his wife is
carrying Abu, who is sleeping. Gordon follows with the doctor who
looks an actor who has just stepped onto the wrong movie set. They
are carrying Adanna's body on a makeshift gurney. Others follow a
few steps behind. It is strangely quiet.
    Precious walks up and peers into the hole. Walter looks at me,
his head nodding, sadness fixed on his face. My eyes meet Gordon's,
and I can see that he is grieving not only for the loss of Adanna, but
other losses too. There's nothing for either of us to say.
    They bring her body next to the grave and set it down. A few of the
women start to cry. Precious joins them, and her wails wake Abu. He
looks around, confused at first, then joins in the mournful chorus.
    The sun is dipping, its last light shooting brilliant colors through
the wisps of clouds to the west.
Scared                                                            275




    Walter opens his worn black Bible, but he doesn't even look at
it. He doesn't need to.
    "Then I heard a voice from heaven say, `Write: Blessed are the
dead who die in the Lord from now on.' `Yes,' says the Spirit, `they
will rest from their labor, for their deeds will follow them.'"
    After her body is lowered, the people each throw in a handful of
dirt. With great sadness, I take the shovel and finish the job, covering
up a most beautiful soul with the soil upon which she walked.
    As the night falls, I am the last to leave. But before I go, I walk
back into the hut and collect the scattered flowers. I lay them gently
on the grave and offer a whispered prayer.
    "Take good care of her, God. She was one of Your best."
                  Chapter Thirty-one

We spend another night at Walter's place, but unlike yesterday, we've
been sitting under a tree since morning tea, not speaking. Gordon is
at the end of himself. I don't know if it will help or hurt, but I finally
decide to give Gordon Adanna's journal.
    I reach into my back pocket and hand it to him.
    He slowly opens the book and reads, and as he does, his
countenance changes. A veil of grief is lifted. He reaches over and
grabs my arm, squeezes it.
    "Thank you."
    Walter is standing with the gogos. Somehow, there's still enough
food for everyone to make it through another day, perhaps even two
or three. It doesn't make any sense. We were certain the food was
nearly gone by the end of the day yesterday.
    A group of children yell in S'swati and point down the hill.
    "Gordon, what is that?"
    "What?"
    "Look down the road."
    Gordon and I follow a group of boys, who are moving like a
swarm. A motorcade is heading this way, and a crowd is forming
along the road.
    Walter has joined the group, craning to see.

                                  276
Scared                                                            277




    "What's this about, Pastor?"
    "I have no idea."
    "Are those flags on the cars?"
    "Those are the king's vehicles! He must have sent an emissary to
help. Praise be to God."
    A shout like an old gunpowder cannon erupts from the people.
They begin dancing in the streets, in the mud. Tears stream down the
gogos' faces as they hug one another and twirl like agile ballerinas.
The men are stomping their feet into the ground and hopping up
and down like grasshoppers, like an ancient tribal dance.
    Black limousines and Mercedes roll to a stop in front of us, and
two huge men get out of a car and take their places by the doors of a
limo. Two more come from behind and join them.
    One of the men opens the limousine door, then bows as a man
wearing an elegant, vibrant red and black royal robe steps out. People
immediately fall to the ground on their knees, bowing their faces low
to the ground. This is not a royal emissary; this is royalty itself, the
king of Swaziland.
    "Greetings, brothers and sisters. I bring the warmest good wishes
of her majesty the queen, the indlovukazi, and the whole Swazi
nation. I am here to bring news to you, my people."
    People slowly stand to their feet.
    "You have suffered through this flood. All that you have worked
for has been washed away. But I, your king, am here to comfort you
and to care for the needs of those who mourn."
    Quiet sets in like an anchor. Some people begin to sob, others
seem hypnotized by the presence of royalty.
    "A tremendous outpouring of kindness has come from the
2 7 8 T o m Da v i s




international community." He pauses for effect. "They have heard
about your plight." Another pause. "And they have seen your
pictures, read about your struggles ... grieved for your dead. You will
no longer hunger and thirst. As I speak, vehicles are moving in this
direction, packed with food, water, medicine, and clothing. All of
your needs will be met. I give you my word."
    A loud cheer breaks the silence. It seems loud enough to reach
all of Africa.
    "I am also here to honor someone who has become a hero of
Swaziland. We all owe her a great debt. It is because of this one that the
international community has come to our aid during this great time of
crisis. Where is the little one who lives in this village named Adanna?"
    The cheering ends abruptly. People look from one to another.
    "Adanna, where are you?" the king asks again. "Today, she is the most
famous person in Swaziland, perhaps in the whole world." He holds up a
newspaper, and a collective gasp escapes from the crowd as they recognize
Adanna's face in the picture. Some of the women begin to cry.
    "Excuse me, your majesty?" I say.
    He looks at me with unmasked curiosity.
    "Yes, my friend. Come forward. Do you know where she is?"
    "I am the photographer who took her picture."
    The king's countenance changes, warms toward me.
    "Your majesty, Adanna isn't here, but I will show you where she
is resting." I motion for Gordon to come alongside me. The king
motions for two bodyguards to follow him.
    "Do you mind a short walk?" He shakes his head and follows.
Gordon and I begin to tell him her story, walking toward the mound
he's not prepared to see.
                  Chapter Thirty-two
New York, 2008

The trees of Central Park look like they're on fire, vibrating with color
as the sun takes the chill out of this clear autumn day. The rent for
this new apartment is outrageous, but the view from this balcony is
worth it. Now that I've added speaking to my job description along
with freelance photography, I can manage it. I'm still traveling, but
mostly in the States these days, speaking about my photos and work
and the HIV crisis around the world. Wangari has booked me on her
docket as she makes the rounds in the diplomatic circuit. I think we
make a good team.
    I'm holding a card in my hands that has left me completely
undone. It's homemade, the work of a creative five-year-old girl in a
faraway land. A huge pink "Congratulations" is written neatly across
it. It is careful, precise work. Probably Gordon's--but clearly with
direction from his beautiful daughter.
    An already familiar cry peals from the next room. I wouldn't
be surprised if people in the apartment below hear it. I am certain I
could hear it from across the park, in the deepest sleep, or surrounded
by a noisy crowd.
    I dash down the tiny hallway, the scent of autumn now mingling
with the smell of fresh paint. I walk over to the crib and reach down

                                 279
2 8 0 T o m Da v i s




to pick up my daughter. My hands look like a giant's hands next to
her tiny body, just five pounds four ounces at birth. But she's the
biggest gift I've ever received.
    "Come to daddy, sweet girl. It's okay."
    Whitney walks into the nursery.
    "You're supposed to be resting," I say.
    "It's okay. I think she's hungry." Whitney's long hair is pulled up
in a mess on top of her head, and she's wearing the same light blue
warm-up suit she's worn for two days, but she has never looked more
beautiful.
    I hand the baby to her.
    "I guess it's lunchtime, sweet 'Danna."
    Whitney walks over to the rocking char and sits down.
    "I want to show you something, Whit." I collect the card and the
gift that came with it, still unwrapped. Whitney reads the card:


             God bless your Adanna and may He give her the
       gift of words that will someday honor Him and her
       namesake. With love, Gordon, Precious, and Abu.


    I open the gift. It is a beautiful journal, empty, awaiting words.
    There's also a photo of the gift-givers. Precious has on a bright yellow
dress, and Abu is wearing dress pants and a red button-down shirt.
Gordon is ... well ... Gordon. They are eating ice cream and grinning.
    Whitney opens the small book and reads the inscription:


       Those tears will run
       Soon in long rivers down the lifted face,
Scared                                                            281




       And leave the vision clear for stars and sun.


    "Those words are beautiful."
    "That's the inscription that was in Adanna's journal. It's from a
poem called `Tears' by some famous poet who lived a long time ago.
Adanna wrote about this poem in her journal. She said that it tells us
sorrow is a part of life, but our tears can leave us with clearer sight,
if we look to God."
    I realize at this moment, the life and death of one little girl has
turned my face toward the sky, toward heaven. The object of my vision
is clear. There is still much mystery, much that I don't understand.
But one thing I do know: God is life and the giver of life.
    Whitney has tears in her eyes. I kneel down and look at my baby
girl. She has my mouth and Whitney's eyes and nose.
    "We chose the right name, Stuart."
    "I think it was chosen for us."
    Adanna.
    Father's daughter.
             ... a little more ...


   When a delightful concert comes to an end,

       the orchestra might offer an encore.

       When a fine meal comes to an end,

     it's always nice to savor a bit of dessert.

      When a great story comes to an end,

         we think you may want to linger.

                And so, we offer ...


AfterWords--just a little something more after you

      have finished a David C. Cook novel.

     We invite you to stay awhile in the story.

                Thanks for reading!


                Turn the page for ...

          · Discussion Questions
       · An Interview with the Author
               Discussion Questions
Use these questions to discuss Scared in a reading group or simply to
explore the story from a new perspective.


1. What was your emotional reaction to the opening of this story?
Was it easy for you to read? Why or why not?


2. In what ways did you identify with Stuart? Adanna?


3. How did the story inspire you? Challenge you?


4. What about the characters or story made you angry or upset?


5. Although this is fiction, it's based on real-life experiences. How
does knowing that Adanna's story isn't far from fact impact what you
take away from it?


6. What is the significance of the role Tagoze plays in this novel?
Why does he get a chapter of his own?


7. How do the various characters grow and change throughout the
story?
8. What was your reaction to the ending of the story?


9. How did Stuart ultimately use the gifts he had been given to make
a difference?


10. In what ways (if any) has this story changed you? What are some
practical ways you can make a difference in the lives of the Adannas
in our world?
                   Author Interview

Let's get right to the big question: What was your inspiration for this
story?


Adanna's story is based on a real story. The first time I went to Africa,
I was constantly confronted with tragic real-life stories of beautiful
children. It was unbearable. There was one little girl I met outside
of the capital city of Swaziland; she had the most precious, innocent
face I'd ever seen. She was happy and filled with joy. Then the director
of the orphanage told me her story. He said she was rescued from an
abusive situation, although at first they didn't know how badly.
    They took her in and loved her as their own. She had the typical
signs of neglect: filthy from head to toe; ratty, shredded clothes
hanging from her body; and bruises and cuts from being hit with
sticks and hands. The first day she was there, all the kids met together
in a group to play a game. When the game started, this little girl was
unable to hold her bladder and had an "episode" in front of everyone.
At first the teachers believed that she had never been potty trained.
Day after day, the same thing occurred. They took her to a doctor and
realized that the abuse was much more severe than they assumed.
    Both of her parents died from AIDS, then a distant uncle took her
in. Her life was reduced to the life of a slave. She was forced to work
fifteen hours a day, and her uncle sold her body to men in the community
so he could have money for alcohol. Then he began violently raping
her on a daily basis. Thus the reason for her incontinence.
    Her story became the story of many little girls I met throughout
Africa. It was more than I could handle. It still is.
    I was compelled to act and had to tell their story. I have to believe
that as people read Scared, they will be moved with compassion and
also compelled to act.


What other characters or circumstances are based on real life?
Without revealing specifics (unless you want to), where did they all
come from?


SPOILER ALERT
Almost every character in the book is taken from a real relationship
I have with someone in Africa. For example, Pastor Walter is one of
the people I admire most in Swaziland. He is a church planter who
cares for hundreds of orphans in his community.
    I know that in times past, Walter has fed the many orphaned
children he cares for while his own children have gone hungry. He's
an amazing man. The faith he has for God's provision in his life
surpasses mine in so many ways.
    He gives out of the very little he has, when it's difficult for me
at times to give out of my abundance. I remember when he told
me about how he was called to care for all of these orphans in his
village. He said that the Bible verse that kept ringing in his ear was
James 1:27, "Pure and undefiled religion is taking care of orphans
and widows in their distress." So he said to God, "Hey, God, You
know I am a poor man. Send me some wealthy people to help me."
God's response was immediate: "Listen, boy, put your hand in your
own pocket, and give to them as I have given to you."
    That's what Walter did. Today, he cares for one thousand orphans
in eight different care points. He's truly an inspiration to me.
    Some of the events are real. The story about the organization
pretending to help people after the flood is true. African people have
been used and taken advantage of in terrible ways--another reason
why it's so important that people who genuinely care get involved,
keep their word, and show them what love really looks like.


Clearly the themes in Scared are things you're passionate about. What
drives that passion?


I believe everyone needs to know about the suffering the children in
Africa endure. It's the definition of injustice and shouldn't be allowed
to exist in the twenty-first century. I know this is difficult for people to
hear. After all, nobody likes to feel helpless or guilty regarding situations
such as this. I assure you that's not my intention. But reality is reality.
    What I want people to know is how easy it is for them to make
a tremendous difference in the life of a child suffering in poverty.
A mere five dollars can be the difference between life and death.
That amount of money can provide life-saving malaria medicine, one
hundred meals, or a mosquito net.
    My passion is driven from the core belief that not only can
everyone in the West do something to help children trapped in
poverty, they must. God's kingdom comes when God's people tackle
issues like these and change the circumstances because of their love.
We are the answer, that's why we must act.


This is your first novel. Describe the process you went through. What
did you learn along the way?


Grueling--that describes the process. I've written three nonfiction
books to this point, and writing them came more naturally. Nonfiction
tends to be more linear, which is how I'm wired to think. I'm so
left-brained! Writing a novel was a completely different process. I
paid the price for the years I didn't pay attention in English literature
and grammar classes in college and high school! I had to go back and
relearn those English lessons in a very short period of time.
    A novel is more like a tapestry. Every scene, every chapter, every
word has to be woven together. And, everything, and I do mean
everything, has to be described. In nonfiction that's not necessary, but
in fiction it's a must.
    What did I learn? I learned that anything is possible if you put all
your heart, mind, and soul into it. Believe me, there were times when I
wasn't sure I'd make it to the finish line. There were days when nothing
I was writing made sense, nights when nothing would come out right,
and weeks when I couldn't write because of my crazy schedule. I probably
wrote over one thousand typed pages just to get three hundred.
    Of course, I had the help of some brilliant people throughout
the process like Lisa Samson, Claudia Mair Burney, Moira Allaby,
and Steve Parolini, who helped me chisel off the rough edges and
shape it brilliantly.
    In the end, I'm very pleased with how the novel turned out. It's a
difficult story, but one that focuses on the true meaning of life and
where we all need to place our hopes no matter what country we live in.


How did the story change from your first draft to the published
version?


SPOILER ALERT
There were several major changes that took place.
    One was Stuart's character. At first, he was much more self-
centered and egotistical; he wasn't likeable at all. Don't get me wrong;
he of course still has many issues to work through in the first half of
the finished book.
    His character was inspired by a man named Kevin Carter. You may
not recognize his name, but you would know a picture he took. It was
a photo of a little Sudanese toddler on the way to a food center who
had fallen in the dirt. She was completely emaciated and obviously
on the brink of starvation. In the background sat a well-fed, quite
plump vulture waiting for her to die. It's horrific. Well, Mr. Carter
became famous for that shot and later won the Pulitzer Prize for feature
photography. Becoming famous for a photo like this, along with the
evil and suffering he viewed through the lens of his camera was more
than he could bear. He committed suicide about sixteen months after
taking that photo. Here's a portion of what he left in his suicide note:
    "I am depressed ... without phone ... money for rent ... money for
child support ... money for debts ... money!!! ... I am haunted by the
vivid memories of killings and corpses and anger and pain ... of starving
or wounded children, of trigger-happy madmen, often police, of killer
executioners...."
    Stuart was headed along the same path as Kevin, but the encounter
he has with Adanna changes him. He undergoes a transformation
that re-creates his values and his view on life, which turns him into
a new man.
    I also changed the number of tragedies that happened to
Adanna. Sadly, what happens to her in the book happens to millions
of children in our world today. It's injustice of the worst kind. But I
couldn't do one more terrible thing to her; I couldn't bear it. There
was a scene were she had to sell her body for a loaf of bread to feed
her brother and sister, but I took it out.
    The ending is completely different than I wrote it the first time.
It was changed about three times. Previously, Adanna didn't die.
She became a bit famous for her poem and went throughout Africa
speaking on AIDS and abuse. That was heartwarming, but it wasn't
reality. This ending is the right one. It fits. It hurts, but it fits.


You include a rather sly (and subtle) reference to Children's HopeChest
in Scared. Tell us more about that organization and your role in it.


Ha, ha, yes very sneaky of me! Without a doubt, Children's HopeChest
is my passion. It represents what I will do for the rest of my life. I've
seen this organization save the lives of so many widows and orphans
around the world. The key for HopeChest is relationships. We want
to empower people to actively engage in the lives of the poor.
    The heart of HopeChest is to be the living reality of that James 1:27
passage I mentioned earlier: "Pure and undefiled religion is taking care of
widows and orphans in their distress." We do that by providing for their
needs in five areas: physical needs, education, medical/dental, emotional,
and spiritual. It's a holistic, redemptive, long-term approach to care for
orphans in a way that is practical. Our goal is to provide the necessary
love and care to widows and orphans so they become leaders in their
communities. They will be the generation that leads their countries out
of poverty, death, and despair. That's what we believe.
    My goal is to connect everyone who has a heart for this kind of
ministry to HopeChest in a way that transforms their life, and the life
of the widow or orphan they touch. If you're interested in engaging
at that level, check out www.hopechest.org or call or e-mail me!


What do you hope readers will walk away with after spending time
in Adanna's world?


I hope through Adanna's voice and life, readers are moved on such a
deep level about the plight of orphans like her that they are compelled
to act. There's one startling truth I've discovered in helping the poor
in our world, and it's this: The difference between life and death for
widows and orphans in our world is me and you. Seriously! As I've
said, five dollars can be the difference between life-saving malaria
medicine and death; it's the cost to provide clean water to someone
for a year; and it also can provide one hundred meals to orphans in
Africa. Every single person reading this can do that.
    I think it's also healthy to walk in other people's shoes. Scared
provides the opportunity to do that. To see the world through the
life of an orphan growing up in Africa, in the midst of complete
destruction is alarming. I can't help but to ask the question, what if
it was me or my kids? What if we were the ones born in a different
place? This is more than just being thankful to live in America. It's
about identifying with someone else's pain and being moved with
compassion.
    It's my firm belief that God has already sent the answers to solve
the world's most difficult issues, and the answer is people like us
getting involved. So take a step to help, just one, and it will change
your life forever!


What are some practical ways readers can help the situation in Africa?


One, go to www.scaredthebook.com. There's a contest going on right
now that will help three incredible African orphans win the dream of
a lifetime! An all-expense-paid education--primary school, secondary
school, even college and university. Whenever I talk to kids in Africa,
they always tell me their number one need is an education. Not food,
not water. Why? Because they say that without an education, they'll
die anyway. On the Web site, you can be a part of fulfilling this dream
and vote for the winner. This is a writing contest, and whoever receives
the most votes will be declared the winner in each category: short
story, memoir, and poetry. We are also raising a million dollars that
will go in an education fund to help pay for thousands of orphans'
education. Check that out at www.orphaneducationfund.org.
    Two, you can help provide one hundred meals to needy orphans
in Africa. How? Go to www.5for50.com. There are five practical
steps listed that will help you really make a difference in the lives of
the poor. We'll even send you a free bracelet just for signing up.
    You can get my nonfiction book Red Letters: Living a Faith That
Bleeds, and get educated about the problem so you can position
yourself to make a difference.
    My blog is another good resource, www.cthomasdavis.com. It
has tons of links, stories and resources to help you on your justice
journey.
    Last but not least, check out the Children's HopeChest Web site,
www.hopechest.org. There you can sponsor a child, sign up for a
trip, or find out how to be more involved.


Are there plans for more novels? Nonfiction works? What's on the
drawing board for the future?


Scared is actually the first book of a series I'm writing. The next book
finds Stuart Daniels in Russia exposing one of the most villainous
and evil industries on the face of the earth, the child sex-slave trade.
This book is a thriller, keeping you on the edge of your seat from the
very first chapter. It is a headfirst dive into the culture and history
of Russia and includes a dangerous confrontation with the mafia in
an attempt to free girls who are sex slaves. Stuart will be stretched
more than ever. He goes underground in hiding at an orphanage and
meets a little boy who is an artist and changes his life.
    I'm also working on a nonfiction book that focuses on merging
ancient Christian practices into our lives in a way that reveals the
kingdom of God through everything we do. I'm very excited about
both of these projects. Stay tuned to my blog to find out more about
when these will release along with special contests I'll be running and
information about videos of Africa and Russia that helped inspire
these books.
