Exploring the very edge of the known
universe, the Doctor, Leela and K9
discover a group of astronauts searching
for the lost gene bank of Minyan race.
During the perilous voyage, the astronauts'
craft plunges into the heart of a recently
formed planet, wherein na awesome
secret is hidden.

How will the Minyan quest end?
What must the Doctor wrest from the Heart of
the Oracle?




        UK: 75p *Australia: $2·75
        Canada: $1·95 New Zealand: $2·95
        Malta: 80c
        *Recommended Price
        ISBN 0 426 20068 3   Cover illustration by Bill Donohoe
          DOCTOR WHO
            AND THE
          UNDERWORLD
Based on the BBC television serial by Bob Baker and Dave
  Martin by arrangement with the British Broadcasting
                      Corporation


             TERRANCE DICKS




                 A TARGET BOOK
                     published by
               The Paperback Division of
                W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd
A Target Book
Published in 1980
by the Paperback Division of W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd.
A Howard & Wyndham Company
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

Novelisation copyright © 1980 by Terrance Dicks
Original script copyright © 1978 by Bob Baker and Dave
Martin
`Doctor Who' series copyright © 1978, 1980 by the British
Broadcasting Corporation

Printed in Great Britain by
Hunt Barnard Printing Ltd, Aylesbury, Bucks


ISBN 0 426 20068 3

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it
is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
               CONTENTS
Prologue
1 The Nebula
2 The Minyans
3 The Intruders
4 The Quest
5 Buried Alive
6 The Trogs
7 Skyfall on Nine
8 The Smoke
9 The Mouth of the Dragon
10 The Sword of Sacrifice
11 The Crusher
12 The Battle
13 Doomsday
14 The Legend
                        Prologue
Once there were the Minyans.
   A humanoid race on an Earth-like planet in a galaxy on
the far side of the Universe.
   Like Man, the Minyans learned the use of tools and
weapons. Like Man, they changed from hunters to farmers,
built villages, banded into tribes, threw up leaders and wise
men. They started the long hard climb that leads all
intelligent life-forms to civilisation, technology, and at last
to the stars.
   On a planet called Gallifrey there were the Time Lords,
a people far advanced in power and wisdom. They had
already conquered Time and Space, and were exploring the
galaxies around them.
   They landed on Minyos and studied the planet and its
people. With the best possible intentions, they decided to
play god.
   The results were catastrophic.
   Not at first, of course. The Time Lords made
themselves known to the Minyans, who promptly began to
worship them. The kindly space gods began conferring the
benefits of science upon them. They taught them the
beginnings of medicine, introduced the wheel, the plough,
steam-power, the internal combustion engine. They altered
the structure of Minyan society to accelerate their
development.
   The Minyans were a bright, aggressive race. They
learned their new lessons with astonishing speed. In a few
short generations they raced up the ladder of progress until
they reached the level of atomic-powered civilisation. Soon
they had mastered space flight and began to explore the
planets around them.
   Their teachers watched the Minyans' progress with self-
satisfied approval. They even passed on the precious secret
of bodily regeneration, so that selected astronauts could
make the long voyages between the stars.
   All in all, the Time Lords thought their experiments a
great success--until Minyan mobs surrounded their bases
and began killing Time Lords.
   Benevolent dictators, worshipped as gods, the Time
Lords had ruled Minyos for hundreds of years. What they
failed to realise was that for every Minyan who worshipped
them, there were a dozen who feared and hated them. A
resistance movement had begun, with the slogan, `Free
Minyos!' Over the generations it grew and grew, until one
day it erupted in revolution. All over the planet, Minyans
appeared at Time Lord bases, with the new shield guns in
their hands.
   So sudden and savage was the attack that most of the
Time Lords on the planet were killed. Only a handful
escaped to Gallifrey where the High Council met for an
agonised post-mortem.
   It is greatly to the credit of the Time Lords that there
was never any question of revenge. Even then, they had
powers at their disposal which could have destroyed the
planet with ease. But they were a moral race, and they
realised that the catastrophe was largely of their own
making. They had learned a bitter and painful lesson.
   `Besides,' said the President of the Council sadly, `it is
neither fitting nor necessary that we should destroy the
Minyans. In the fullness of time, they will surely destroy
themselves.'
   The prophecy was very soon fulfilled. After the
expulsion of the Time Lords, the Minyans began warring
amongst themselves. Thanks to the Time Lords, the wars
were fought not with swords and spears but with atomic
missiles.
   They destroyed their planet.
   One black day a junior Tirne Lord on scanning duty in
the Temporal Control Room made a routine check on
Minyos and found it no longer existed. It had been
fragmented by a series of colossal atomic explosions. A
scattering of radioactive asteroids occupied the space where
once there had been a world.
   The effect on the Time Lords was shattering. With the
death of a planet on their consciences, they developed a
policy of non-intervention. Their curiosity was too great to
confine themselves to Gallifrey. They would continue their
quest for knowledge, continue to study the inhabited
planets of the Universe. But in future they would only
observe and record. They would never, never interfere.
   (Non-intervention remained official Time Lord policy,
though later it was modified under the influence of a
renegade Time Lord known as the Doctor.)
   But Minyos was not dead, not completely. In the years
before the holocaust, a few far-sighted Minyans had sought
means of escaping the coming disaster. They had
developed a mind-pacifier, though too late to end the wars.
They had sent out hastily constructed scout ships, and had
actually found a habitable world in a solar system close to
their own. They established a tiny colony on this world,
which they had christened Minyos II. They had gathered
the genetic heritage of Minyos into a Race Bank, and
despatched it to Minyos II in a space ship called the P7E.
   The P7E was never to reach Minyos II. A failure in its
guidance systems sent it far off course. It vanished,
somewhere in the colossal turbulence at the edge of
creation. Faint signals were picked up from its automatic
distress beacon. They faded and died.
   The scientists of Minyos staked everything on one last
gamble. Straining the resources of their dying planet, they
built an Interstellar Patrol Vessel, a massively powerful
craft designed for an eternal voyage. They equipped it with
perpetual energy-generators, with re-cycling and
regeneration equipment, chose the finest and most
dedicated astronauts on Minyos for its crew.
    During the final days of Minyos. the Interstellar Patrol
Vessel blasted off on its vital mission to find the lost P7E
and bring the Race Bank safely to Minyos II.
    Soon after the ship blasted off, the planet blasted itself
from existence.
    In the endless years that followed the little colony on
Minyos II waited for a ship that never came. With the Race
Bank, it could create a new Minyan race, people the planet
and re-create the world that had been destroyed. Without
it, it could do little more than survive.
    The Interstellar Patrol Vessel roamed the turbulent
frontiers of creation, endlessly searching for the ship that
held the survival of the Minyan race.
    A hundred thousand years went by.
    Then one day, the Minyans crossed the path of the
Time Lords once again. Or rather, that of one particular
Time Lord.
    A renegade known as the Doctor...
                    Chapter One
                    The Nebula
It was the edge of creation.
   Even the expanding Universe must have a frontier, and
this was it, An area of incredible turbulence, where stars,
planets, whole galaxies flamed into existence in the
twinkling of a cosmic eye.
   Through this howling chaos there moved a mystery. It
was small and square and blue with a flashing light on top.
Strange symbols were written above the door. Two words
in one of the languages of an immeasurably distant planet
called Earth--`Police Box'.
   The police box was not a police box at all, but a
space/time craft called the TARDIS. Inside its incredibly
large control room was a girl. She was tall and strong: she
wore a brief animal-skin costume and a heavy fighting
knife.
   The girl's name was Leela, and she was the companion
of a traveller in Time and Space known as the Doctor.
Leela had grown up in a tribe that lived by perpetual
warfare. She joined the Doctor in search of excitement, and
found herself involved in a series of adventures more
terrifying than she could ever have imagined.
   Leela was quick-witted and resourceful, and she had
soon adapted herself to her new life. But some things still
baffled her. One of them was the TARDIS itself.
   To begin with, there was its shape. The Doctor had
explained that it looked like something called a `police
box'. As far as Leela could understand, this was a device for
summoning the city guards in a town called London, on
the planet Earth.
   (She had once visited London with the Doctor, but
there had been no other police boxes about. The Doctor
explained they hadn't been invented yet.)
   The TARDIS was shaped like a police box because
something called the `chameleon mechanism' had got
stuck. It was supposed to enable the TARDIS to blend
with its surroundings. But now it was jammed, so the
TARDIS remained in the shape of a police box on planets
where police boxes, policemen, or even human beings were
completely unknown.
   Then there was its size. From the outside it was only big
enough to hold one, or at most two people. Yet inside it
held not only the control room in which she was now
standing, but an apparently infinite number of rooms,
passages, chambers, corridors of every shape and size.
   The heart of the TARDIS was the many-sided central
control console which Leela was now regarding nervously.
The Doctor habitually spoke to the TARDIS as if it were
alive, chatting to it, reproving it, giving it the occasional
pat on the back. Leela had become convinced that the
TARDIS was alive. She treated it like a minor god, to be
flattered and cajoled. She would have garlanded the
console with flowers and offered the occasional sacrifice if
the Doctor had let her. What worried Leela at the moment
was the fact that the centre column of the console had
stopped moving up and down, which meant that the
TARDIS had stopped.
   Had the Doctor, mysteriously absent in some other part
of the ship, ordered the TARDIS to stop? Had it decided to
stop of its own accord? Or had it broken down in some
way?
   At Leela's feet there was a kind of robot dog, with
squared-off body and head, antennae for ears and tail, It
was called K9.
   K9 looked like a dog, and sometimes even acted like
one, but in reality he was a complex and sophisticated
computer, built by a space-travelling scientist who missed
the dog he'd left behind on Earth. K9 was self-powered,
independently mobile, and had built-in offensive
capabilities--in other words, a blaster in his nose.
    Leela said, `K9, we've stopped!'
    K9 cocked his metal head in a curiously dog-like
fashion. `Affirmative!'
    `We've stopped dead!'
    `Negative dead.' Like all computers, K9 had a very
literal mind.
    The Doctor marched into the control room. He was
wearing a painter's smock, a floppy beret, and carrying an
enormous brush.
    `What on Earth have you been doing, Doctor?'
    `Decorating,' said the Doctor with dignity.
    `I thought the TARDIS could maintain itself?'
    `Well, so she can, after a fashion. Can't always trust her
taste though. You remember I didn't like the way she did
the spare control room, all that white?'
    Leela nodded.
    `Well, when I told her, she said I was welcome to try and
do better myself. So I am!' The Doctor flourished his
paintbrush, sending drips of blue paint everywhere.
`Rather a pleasing shade of aquamarine, don't you think?'
    `Doctor, we've stopped. Nothing's gone wrong, has it?'
    The Doctor wandered over to the console. `Not so far,
no.'
    `Then why are we not going anywhere?'
    The Doctor touched a control and a wall-panel slid back
to reveal a monitor screen. It was blank. The Doctor
frowned and checked the controls again. `That's intensely
interesting! Do you realise, Leela, we've stopped because
there's nowhere to go? As far as I can make out, we're on
the edge of the cosmos, the very frontiers of creation, the
boundary between is and isn't. Or isn't yet, anyway. Don't
you think that's interesting?'
    `Well, I suppose so...'
    `What?' The Doctor peered into the blackness on the
screen. `I feel just like a goldfish, looking out into a new
world!'
   `But it's just black nothing out there. We're stuck here
on our own, and there's just--nothing!'
   From somewhere near ground level there came an
electronic voice. `We are not alone!'
   The Doctor stared at Leela in indignation. `Nothing?
What do you mean, nothing?'
   `Nothing!' said Leela defiantly.
   `But it's a magnificent nothingness! Do you realise, at
any minute, any second, a whole new world could be born
out there, and we'd be the first--'
   K9 piped up again. `We are not the first!'
   The Doctor ignored him. `--the first intelligent--' he
glanced at Leela, `well, semi-intelligent beings to witness
the spectacle.'
   `We are not alone!'
   `What does he mean, not alone?' demanded the Doctor
irritably.
   `I don't know!'
   K9 was happy to explain. `We are not the first. We are
not alone! ` He glided closer. `Receptors indicate pulsing.
Pulsing characteristic of ion drive system. The inference
would be: spacecraft in vicinity.'
   `Where?'
   K9 reeled off a string of spatial co-ordinates. `Thirty-
four, seven, zero, one, seventeen, fifty, zero, five...'
   The Doctor hurried to the console. `Beyond visual
range. Might get it on audio.' He reached for the audio-
scanner controls and began tracking them delicately to and
fro. Suddenly a faint but regular electronic pulsing came
from the speaker. `Listen, Leela, listen... Ion drive or I'm a
budgie's cousin!'
   `Affirmative, ion drive,' said K9 importantly. `Doctor's
family grouping, negative.'
   `Oh, shut up, K9!'
   `Doctor! ` said Leela reproachfully.
   `I can tell him to shut up if I want to...'
    Leela glanced at the screen, and suddenly realised it was
no longer blank. A fiery point of light had appeared at its
centre. It seemed to be getting bigger, and it was getting
bigger. `Doctor, look!'
    By now the light was a fiery whirlpool, almost filling the
monitor screen. The Doctor gave a yell of alarm. `What is
it, Doctor?'
    `A spiral nebula! A gas cloud, coalescing to form a whole
new star system, sucking in everything around it like a
whirlpool...'
    `Including us?'
    `If we're not careful.' The Doctor was busy trying to
break the TARDIS free of the nebula's pull. `It's time we
got out of here!'
    He increased the power, but the nebula sucked the
TARDIS closer, closer... The Doctor's mind was racing.
Trying to work out the balance of opposing forces and
calculate the best possible escape-path.
    Suddenly he realised there was a computer at his feet,
able to do the job even quicker. `K9! Optimum escape
trajectory, quickly!'
    K9 whirred briefly, and his eye-screens lit up. `Thirty-
four, seven, zero, one, seventeen, fifty, zero, five...'
    Leela found the figures strangely familiar. `Isn't that
where that... ion drive thing was coming from? Where the
space ship is?'
    `Yes--but I'll just have to risk it.'
    The spiral nebula hung in the blackness of space like a
giant flaming catherine wheel, a whirlpool of fire sucking
the square blue shape of the TARDIS closer, closer... The
TARDIS disappeared.
                    Chapter Two
                    The Minyans
The giant space ship was time-battered, space-weathered,
almost a derelict. The big square hull was patched and
scarred and worn, like the enormous fin of the solar sail.
   Propelled by the faint but steady pulsing of its ion drive,
the vessel sped steadily towards a distant spiral nebula, so
far away that it was little more than-a blazing point of light
in the blackness of space.
   Inside the space ship, there was an impression of
massive, worn-out yet somehow still-functioning
machinery. The control room was enormous with ribbed
steel walls and great arched metal instrument banks set
about the floor. At the front, where the control room
narrowed with the nose of the ship, a great curved viewing-
port was set into the wall. Below it was the raised
command deck, with a semi-circle of, padded acceleration
couches set around the main control consoles.
   Tala was piloting the ship on manual and visual control
systems. She was a tall woman, incredibly old, face seamed
and wrinkled, hair grey and wispy. Nevertheless, her hands
moved over the controls with total confidence. There were
three other crew members. On Tala's right in the
command chair was Jackson, captain of this strange vessel.
A massive figure, square-jawed, with iron-grey hair, he sat
gazing at the viewing-port, hands resting on his knees, like
some heroic statue.
   Next to hint was Herrick, younger, round-faced, curly-
haired, a man who should have been full of vitality and
enthusiasm. Instead he was slumped at his post, as if
overcome by weariness.
   Orfe, the fourth member of the crew, sat at a sub-control
console, to Tala's left. Tall and lean, with a long, quizzical
face, Orfe looked like a born joker. But he studied his
instruments with the same gloomy intensity as the others.
    All four astronauts were strong and fit; all except Tala,
relatively young. But all four seemed in the grip of some
terrible lassitude, as if every word, every gesture cost
tremendous effort. An atmosphere of doom lay over the
entire ship. They were rallying themselves to deal with a
minor crisis--a mysterious, unexplained noise...
    Tala finished checking the scanners. `Nothing up front,
Captain.' She rubbed her hand over her eyes. `Only the
spiral nebula on two, four, zero.'
    `All right, Tala, stay on watch. Orfe, check that nebula.'
    `Nebula on two, four, zero, checking,' said Orfe
mechanically. `Couldn't have been the nebula, Captain, it's
too far away.'
    `Herrick, have you got anything?'
    `Nothing on targeter, sir. There's no trace, no blip,
nothing.'
    Jackson shook his head, as if to clear it. `All right, let's
think it through again. It's not inside, it's not outside,
nobody saw it and we got no trace. But we all heard it--
didn't we?' One by one the others nodded. `Then what was
it? Orfe, re-run the tape, let's hear it again.'
    A strange, wheezing, groaning sound filled the control
room.
    As the noise faded away, Jackson looked round. `Now
then, was that noise generated inside or outside the ship?
Has anybody ever heard anything like it before?'
    Like lethargic marionettes, the others all shook their
heads.
    `All right, Orfe, run it through computer ident.'
    `Ident running, sir.' If the sound, or anything like it,
had ever been encountered before, the fact would be
recorded in the computer's memory-bank.
    With infinite, weary patience, they sat and waited.
The Doctor looked up from the scanner. `As far as I can
gather, we've managed to materialise inside something
else--a space ship presumably. Probably the one K9
spotted.'
   `Affirmative, Master.'
   Leela looked at the scanner. It showed metal walls all
round. `What do we do now?'
   The Doctor was stripping off his painter's smock and
beret and replacing them with his usual hat, coat and
immensely long multi-coloured scarf. `We're well clear of
the nebula by now, so we could just go on our way...'
   `But you don't want to?'
   `Well, we could just take a quick look round,' suggested
the Doctor hopefully. `I'm rather intrigued to know what a
space ship's doing, wandering along the fringes of the
Universe.'
   Brave as Leela was, she had a strong streak of primitive
caution. In Leela's world danger had been all around--the
aim was to keep away from it and stay alive. She had never
quite understood the Doctor's habit of cheerfully rushing
into some unknown peril out of sheer curiosity. `Will it be
safe, going out there?'
   `Shouldn't think so for a moment!' The Doctor opened
the doors, and led the way outside. Leela followed, K9
glided after them.
   They were in a huge gloomy metal chamber, lined with
racks holding a variety of strangely shaped devices.
Opposite the TARDIS was a massive steel door.
   Leela sniffed the atmosphere, like a wild beast entering
a strange jungle. `The air is stale.'
   Hands plunged deep into his pockets, the Doctor stood
gazing around him. He nodded absently.
   Instinctively checking for an escape route, Leela hurried
to the door. `It's locked!' As she took her hands away from
the door, her fingers were covered with dust. `Nobody's
been in here for years.'
   Carefully the Doctor lifted a round metallic object from
a wall-rack and hefted it in his hand.
    He studied its design. `Made in Minyos, made in
Minyos,' he muttered. `Got it! The Minyans of Minyos.
This could be a Minyan patrol vessel.' He turned to Leela.
`Have you ever heard of the Flying Dutchman?'
    `No.'
    `Pity, I've often wanted to know who he was.' The
Doctor went down on one knee and held the metal sphere
close to K9's nose. `Dating, K9?'
    There was a buzz and a whirr as K9's sensors went into
action. `Isotope decay rate indicates one hundred K range.'
    `Yes, I thought as much.'
    Leela sighed. `Oh yes, me too!'
    The Doctor fitted the metal sphere carefully back into
its rack. `This fission grenade is a hundred thousand years
old,' he said impressively. `The Minyan civilisation was
destroyed a hundred thousand years ago, on the other side
of the Universe.'
    `Come on, Doctor--explain!' Leela said.
Orfe studied the flow of symbols across the computer read-
out screen. `Ident concluded, sir. Sound identified as
relative dimensional stabiliser in materialisation phase. As
used in...' Orfe stopped, unable to believe what he was
reading.
   `As used in what?'
   `As used in the time ships of the gods.'
The Doctor was delivering a potted version of Minyan
history. `It was what happened on Minyos that led the
Time Lords to develop the policy of non-intervention.'
   `Non-what?'
   `Non interfering in other people's business! You see,
when we landed on Minyos, the Minyans thought we were
gods--which was very flattering, of course. We were new to
space exploration, and we thought we could help.'
   `What did you do?'
   `Oh, we gave them all kinds of medical and scientific
aid, better communications, better weapons. Little things
like that.'
   `What happened?'
   `They kicked us out at gunpoint, then went to war with
each other. Learned how to split the atom, discovered the
toothbrush, and finally split the planet.'
   `Then this ship must have got away before the planet
was destroyed?'
   `That's right.'
   `You said that was a hundred thousand years ago.
Nobody lives for a hundred thousand years--do they?'
Tala continued piloting the ship on manual. She was dizzy
now, great waves of blackness swirling before her eyes. She
shook her head to clear it, hunching forward over the
controls, her wrinkled face twisting in concentration. She
looked older than ever now.
    Unaware of Tala's condition, Orfe and Herrick were
arguing heatedly. `If it is the gods,' Orfe was saying
patiently, `they'll help us. They'll help us with the Quest.'
    Herrick's voice was shaking with anger. `Help us? Like
they helped us before, I suppose? Helped us to destroy
ourselves. If it is the gods--and there's no way we can tell,
because that computer's worn out like everything else on
this ship--but if it is the gods, then they're the reason for
it all.'
    Jackson intervened. `Control yourself, Herrick, The
reason for what?'
    `Well, everything,' spluttered Herrick furiously. `The
Quest, everything! They're playing games with us! They do,
you know. The gods use us for their sport. Time Lords!
We should have wiped out the lot of them when we had the
chance.'
    Orfe shook his head. `We brought our destruction upon
ourselves.'
    The argument raged on. As the catastrophe had
approached, the doomed Minyans had split into two
opposing schools of thought. Some thought that the
terrible wars devastating the planet were the fault of the
Minyans themselves. They had misused the gifts the Time
Lords had given them. The second, and far larger party
blamed everything on the Time Lords, saying that the
crisis would never have occurred if the Minyans had been
allowed to develop at their own pace.
   Orfe belonged to the first party, Herrick to the second,
and they had been through this argument many times
before.
   Finally Herrick jumped to his feet, reaching for his
blaster. `Pacifist! ` he snarled contemptuously. `Well, I'll
tell you this, Orfe, if I get one of your precious Time Lords
in my sights, I'll dematerialise him for good! And if they
are on board this ship, then I'll soon sniff 'em out!'
   Jackson intervened. `Sit down, Herrick, you're sup-
posed to be on duty.'
   `But, sir!'
   `Sit down.'
   Herrick subsided. Jackson glanced at his console. `Time
for the next scan. Tala, set her up for the next sweep.'
   `Yes, sir.' Tala's face was turned away from Jackson, and
he couldn't see the terrible weariness that filled it. She
began setting up the scan, fighting off the waves of
dizziness that came ever more frequently now.
   Jackson turned to Orfe. `Next quadrant please, Orfe.'
   `Course two, four, zero and cube, sir.'
   `Two, four, zero and cube,' repeated Tala. `It's going to
take us very close to that spiral nebula, Captain.'
   `I know. But we have no choice. The Quest is the Quest.'
   `The Quest is the Quest,' repeated Orfe ritually. It was
the answer to all questions, all objections.
   Hand on the main power control, Tala suddenly
collapsed, jamming the lever fully forward with the weight
of her body. Controls locked, the Minyan patrol vessel sped
straight for the blazing heart of the spiral nebula.
                  Chapter Three
                  The Intruders
The sudden dip and lurch of the space ship sent the Doctor
and Leela to the floor in a heap. Even K9 shot forwards,
bumping his nose against the metal wall.
   The ship steadied and the Doctor picked himself up.
`You all right, K9?'
   `Affirmative.'
   Leela got to her feet--a little put out that the Doctor
seemed more worried about K9 than he was about her.
`What happened?'
   `Trouble,' said the Doctor laconically. `Blast that door
open, K9!'
   K9 swivelled to face the door, and the muzzle of his
blaster protruded from beneath his nose. But nothing
happened. Apparently the sudden jolt had affected him
after all.
   `Blaster malfunction,' said K9. `Blaster malfunction,
blaster malfunction, blaster malfunction...'
   The Doctor bent over him. `One of the circuits must
have jammed.'
   Leela strode swiftly over to the nearest wall-rack and
selected one of the strangely shaped weapons. It was a kind
of giant blaster, with a built-in square shield between butt
and nozzle, so that whoever was using it had cover from
the weapons of his enemies.
   The firing mechanism was unfamiliar, but Leela had a
natural instinct for any kind of weapon. She flicked off the
safety-catch, trained the shield gun on the doorway arid
fired.
   There was a sudden roar of power and the door
disintegrated in a shower of molten metal. Leela flicked
back the safety-catch and looked down at the shield gun in
awe. `What is this thing?'
   `It's a Lieberman maser,' said the Doctor grimly. `Fires
charged particles along a laser beam. Don't ever play with
strange weapons, Leela.'
   `No, Doctor,' said Leela obediently. But she tightened
her grip on the shield gun. If there was going to be trouble,
this was just the kind of weapon she needed.
   `And if you must carry it, switch the safety-catch off!'
   `Yes, Doctor.' Leela switched off the safety-catch, so that
the weapon was ready for firing. The Doctor stepped
through the smoking hole that had once been a door, and
set off along the corridor beyond. Leela and K9 followed.
   The Doctor turned, a finger to his lips. `Sssh!' he said
urgently.
   `Sssh!' repeated Leela.
   K9 cocked his head. `Sssh? Query Sssh! Please amplify
instruction!'
   `Shut up and be quiet, K9,' whispered the Doctor.
`Come on!'
Herrick grabbed the unconscious Tala and carried her to a
couch at the side of the control room, Jackson and Orfe
were trying to bring the ship back on course.
    `She's levelled out,' said Jackson hopefully.
    `There's nothing on rudders, sir. We're jammed on
maximum power.'
    `Do what you can, Orfe. Can you shut down drive?'
    Orfe nodded and soon the throb of the ion-drive faded.
`It still won't reduce her speed, sir. She's already reached
maximum velocity.'
    Jackson looked up at the big forward viewing-port. It
was entirely filled by the glowing spiral nebula. The ship
was heading straight towards it at frightening speed. `What
about using reverse thrust?'
    `No good, sir. We'd just tear the ship in two.'
    Jackson sat very still for a moment. `Right. Give her all
the power you can on port, main and auxiliaries. Shut
down all starboard propulsion units.'
    `Yes, sir! `
   Jackson stared at the fiery circle in the viewing-port.
`Unless we manage to veer off before we hit the gravity
field that thing will suck us down like a whirlpool.'
   Herrick was still trying to revive the unconscious Tala.
   `How is she?'
   `Not too good, Captain. She's gone past her regen point.
Deliberately, just like the others.'
   Jackson sighed. There was a specific optimum point for
regeneration, and to go beyond it was a form of attempted
suicide. In the long years of the mission, several of his crew
had deliberately chosen this way out.
   `None of us likes it, Herrick, but the Quest is the Quest.
Do you think you can save her?'
   `Anything I can do?'
   Herrick and Orfe whirled round. In the doorway stood a
tall, strangely dressed man. `How do you do?'
   Jackson stared unbelievingly at him. `Who are you?'
   `I'm the Doctor.'
   `How did you get in here?'
   `Through the door, of course.'
   Herrick lunged forward, reaching for his blaster. `He's
one of them--he's a Time Lord!'
   Leela appeared behind the Doctor, shield gun in hand.
`Stop!'
   Herrick froze. `I told you, sir. I told you they were on
board!'
   Leela was concentrating on Herrick. Her instincts told
her he was the most dangerous of the group. She didn't
notice Orfe moving quietly over to something that looked
like a tripod-mounted spotlight. He swung it to cover her
and touched a control...
   There was a beam of light, a soft electronic chime, and
immediately Leela felt the most extraordinary sensation
flooding over her.
   Leela had been trained as a warrior, and the softer side
of her nature had been repressed from a very early age. But
it was still there, and now she felt the extraordinary
upsurge of love and tenderness. She gave Orfe a smile of
melting affection. `Thank you,' she said softly.
   Herrick sprang forward and snatched the shield gun
from Leela's unresisting hands. He jumped back, bringing
the gun up to cover the two intruders. `Get back, both of
you. Back against that wall!'
   The Doctor obeyed. Leela followed, still smiling
happily.
   `I'll wipe 'em out now, shall I, sir? Just one quick blast...'
   `Calmly, Herrick. Wait for the word of command.'
   Jackson studied the Doctor thoughtfully. `You say you
want to help us?'
   `Certainly, if I can.'
   `Are you a Time Lord?'
   The Doctor hesitated. The Minyans had no reason to
love his people. But it would be impossible to conceal the
truth for long. How else could they have arrived on board,
if not in a TARDIS? `Yes,' he said slowly. `I'm a Time
Lord.'
   Herrick's hands tightened on the shield gun. `Then why
did you lie to us, say you were a doctor? I'm going to deal
with you now!'
   As he raised the shield gun, Jackson snapped, `Orfe!'
   Orfe swivelled the device, there was a beam of light and
a chime--and Herrick stepped back, lowering the gun.
`Thank you, Orfe.' He smiled at the Doctor. `Sorry, friend.'
   `That's all right, old chap.' The Doctor looked down at
Tala. `What happened to her?'
   Jackson said, `She passed the regen point and collapsed.
We know what to do.'
   `Well if you know what to do, why don't you do it?'
   `Herrick, take Tala to regen--now!'
   `Yes, sir.' Herrick swung Tala's limp body over his
shoulder and carried her away.
   The Doctor heard a soft voice at his side. `Doctor!'
Leela was gazing across the control room at Orfe with a
smile on her face that could only be described as soppy.
`His name is Orfe, Doctor.'
   `Yes, that's right.'
   Leela sighed. `What a beautiful name!'
   Jackson snapped, `Orfe, come and look after her, then
get back to your post.'
   `Yes, sir.' Orfe came over to Leela, took her by the arm
and led her away unresisting.
   The Doctor shook his head unbelievingly. `Well, well,
well! So you did develop the pacifier after all?'
   `Very few though, and too late. That's one of the
prototype models. Takes enormous power, and can only be
used in the ship.'
   `How long does the effect last?'
   `It depends.' Jackson glanced across at Leela who was
sitting meekly on one of the side couches, gazing adoringly
at Orfe. `Is she a primitive?'
   The Doctor smiled, thinking of Leela when she was her
normal self. `Oh, yes. Very!'
   `Well, it could take several hours then.' Jackson led the
Doctor towards the command deck. `You say you're a
scientist, a doctor?'
   `That's right.'
   `Of medicine?'
   `Of practically everything,' said the Doctor modestly.
   `Crystallocybernetics?'
   `My dear chap, one of my particular specialities. What's
the problem?'
   Jackson nodded towards the blazing nebula that filled
the screen. `That is!' He pointed to the main control
console. `And this--it's jammed, and worn out.'
   `How much time have we got?'
   `We haven't. We're already in the gravitational field. We
could still pull free though, if we had the guidance systems
working. That's the problem. I think the terminal cores
must have fragmented.'
   `Mind if I have a look?'
    Jackson lifted off the main inspection hatch, and the
Doctor peered thoughtfully inside the console. He glanced
curiously up at Jackson, struck by a strange lethargy in the
captain's manner. Despite his obvious competence he
seemed exhausted, weary to the soul, a man operating on
the very edge of his reserves. There was something about
the others too... And the old woman who'd collapsed.
    Studying the maze of delicate circuitry the Doctor said,
`Been a long trip, has it?'
    Jackson was silent for a moment. Then he began to
speak, his voice deep and slow, every syllable produced
with enormous effort. `We've been in mission a hundred
thousand years, Doctor. The ship wasn't designed for
that... Neither were we. Each one of us has regenerated
over a thousand times. Have you any idea what that
means?'
    The Doctor had. Regeneration can prolong life to an
amazing extent, but it was never intended to be a ticket to
immortality. If the body regenerates too often, the essential
life-force, the soul itself, begins to weary and fail. In time
each new lease of life becomes an intolerable burden, until
the exhausted spirit longs for the repose of death.
    The crew of this ship must have reached and passed that
point long, long ago.
    Embarrassed, the Doctor said, `Well, I've been through
regeneration a time or two myself. Not pleasant...' He bent
over the console.
In the regeneration room, Herrick laid Tala gently into
what looked like a padded coffin, and lowered a
transparent cover over her.
   He went to a bank of controls, hesitated, then threw the
switch. The body of the old woman in the transparent case
twisted and writhed... and changed.
   The regeneration method of the Time Lords was largely
a natural one. A combination of genetic coding and long
yoga-like training enabled them to trigger the regeneration
process themselves at the appropriate time. The process
used by the Minyans was machine-aided, swift, brutal and
mercilessly efficient.
   Face filled with compassion, Herrick watched as the old
woman in the regeneration-chamber, grew younger,
younger...
   When the body in the case was that of a girl of twenty-
five, the hum of power died away.
   Herrick threw back the lid of the regeneration-case, and
helped Tala to rise. Shakily at first, but with increasing
strength, she walked across the regeneration-chamber to
gaze at her reflection in the polished steel mirror.
   As she looked at her smooth unwrinkled skin and dark,
shining hair, her face filled with despair. `Again!' she
whispered softly.
   Once again, she had been sentenced to life.
The Doctor worked on, dismantling circuitry that had
worn fragile with unimaginable years of use,
   Above him Jackson's voice droned away. It was as if the
Doctor's arrival had unlocked a long-dammed flood of
speech. `None of us wants to go on, Doctor, and yet we
must. The Quest is the Quest. By now we are like the ship,
degenerating faster than we can regenerate ourselves. Not
the body, not the mind, but the spirit itself wears out... we
are a ship of ghosts, going on and on, unable to remember
why...'
   The Doctor straightened up, his voice cutting across the
poetic image. `This has had it, I'm afraid.' He held out his
hand. In it rested a crystal, once sparkling and beautiful,
now dull and clouded, its surface crazed by a thousand
hair-line cracks. The Doctor tightened his fingers and the
crystal exploded in a puff of dust. `You've no more core
crystals?'
   `That was the last.'
   Crystallocybernetic guidance systems had many
advantages, but once the crystals wore out they could never
be repaired, only replaced.
   Jackson stared at the roaring nebula, filling the entire
viewing-port as the ship raced ever closer. `It's finished,
then, finished at last. The Quest is over!'
                    Chapter Four
                     The Quest
`Nonsense,' said the Doctor cheerfully. `One can always
bodge something up.' Though in this case it was going to
be difficult, he thought. `Tell me about this Quest of
yours?'
    `It's for a missing space ship, Doctor... our sister ship,
the P7E. We get signals from time to time, we track it and
lose it, track it and lose it...'
    The Doctor felt the long hopeless years of searching that
lay behind the words. `But surely after all this time... there
won't be any survivors?'
    `Probably not.'
    `Then why go on?'
    Jackson paused. `The P7E was carrying colonists. The
entire future of the Minyan race depends on our finding
her.'
    `Ah, I see! Does the P7E carry regeneration equipment,
too?'
    `Yes, Doctor. And the most advanced computer we ever
developed. Something far more important, too, at least to
us. It carried our future, the future of the entire Minyan
race.'
    `A Race Bank?'
    Jackson pointed to a coffin-shaped crystal case set into
the main console. It was empty--but through the
transparent lid the Doctor could see two shallow
depressions; they might have been made to hold two
enormous eggs. `The place is prepared but the Race Banks
are not there,' said Jackson sadly. `They would give us the
chance to establish a new people on a new planet--Minyos
II.' Jackson stared at the fast-approaching nebula. `At least,
that was the theory. It's all finished now, of course.'
   The Doctor's mind had been busy during Jackson's
recital. `Oh, I don't know,' he said cheerfully. `Seems a pity
to give up now, after all you've been through. Anyway, I've
had an idea. There might just be a ghost of a chance, if it's
at all compatible...'
   The Doctor pulled a tool kit from under the console and
sorted out two metal connector-clips.
   `Compatible? If what's compatible?'
   `You'll see! K9! Where are you, boy? Come on, heel,
K9!'
   Jackson watched in astonishment as the robot dog
glided into the control room. `What is it?'
   The Doctor knelt down and patted K9's head. `He's my
second-best friend, aren't you, K9?'
   `Affirmative.'
   The Doctor plunged his arms inside the control console,
wrenched out two lengths of cable, fastened the clips to
their ends and attached the clips to K9's ears. `Now, let's
try it out. Can you feel anything, K9?'
   `Affirmative. Contact established.'
   `Good! From now on, you're in charge. We want to
avoid that nebula. It's all yours, K9--you're on!'
   K9 began to throb with self-importance. `On line. In
link-up. Rudder control positive. Acceleration positive. All
systems ready, stand by for g-loading, all systems
positive...' K9's voice speeded to an unintelligible babble as
he took over control of the ship. There was a rising throb
of power from the drive systems as the ship banked
sharply, and a sudden increase in gravitational pull that
pressed them back against the acceleration couches. The
ship veered again, righted itself, and the intolerable
pressure ceased. The roar of the motors dropped to a steady
hum, and in the viewing port the nebula dropped away to
starboard and began to recede in the distance.
   Orfe said shakily, `We've made it. We made it, Captain!'
   Jackson seemed unable to take in the fact of their
escape.
   Herrick came into the control room, a newly-
regenerated Tala by his side.
   Captain Jackson rubbed a hand over his eyes, began
acting as if nothing had happened. `Ah, there you are, Tala.
I see you came through regen all right. Don't leave it so
late next time. I know you're exhausted but the Quest--'
   `Is the Quest,' concluded Tala. `Yes, Captain, I
understand.'
   `Right, everybody, back on station, it's time for the next
sweep. Tala, take over from Orfe.'
   Tala moved to the controls, and began operating the
scanner beam.
   The Doctor looked at the busy scene in mild
astonishment. So ingrained was the routine of the ship,
that once the crisis was over, Jackson reverted to it without
a second thought.
   Jackson was telling Herrick what had happened.
Herrick stared suspiciously down at K9. `It's some kind of
trick, Captain, a scheme to seize control of the ship.'
   `I don't care what it is--we've got full power on all
systems for the first time in I don't know how long.'
   `He's a Time Lord,' said Derrick obstinately. `You know
what they're like. They can't be trusted. Suppose he's just
setting us up for something else, something worse?'
   Jackson ignored him. `Orfe, boost that scanner beam,
let's see what we can do on full power. Tala, course two,
four, zero, and cube it. Herrick, get back on tracking.'
   The Doctor went across to sit beside Leela, who was still
gazing longingly across the control room. `His name is
Orfe, Doctor,' she whispered dreamily. `What a beautiful
name!'
   The Doctor frowned. Apparently the pacifier beam had
had a massive effect on Leela's relatively defenceless mind,
with the unfortunate side-effect of fixing her affections on
Orfe.
   The Doctor decided he'd had enough of this new Leela.
He'd better do something about it before the condition
became permanent. He leaned forward and touched a
finger to her forehead, sending her into a light hypnotic
trance. `Leela? Leela, listen to me. You're primitive, wild,
warlike, aggressive, tempestuous--and bad-tempered, too!'
    Leela stared mistily at him. `I am?'
    `Yes! You're a warrior, Leela, from a warrior tribe,
courageous, indomitable, implacable--impossible!'
    Something clicked inside Leela's brain, She shook her
head, stared wildly at the Doctor--then came to her feet in
one smooth flowing motion, the knife in her hand inches
from his throat. `That's far enough! You--stay where you
are!'
    Feeling he'd overdone things a little, the Doctor said,
`No! No! Put that knife away. It's all right, Leela, you were
just pacified.'
    Leela glared threateningly round the control room.
`Who did it?' she snarled. `Who did it? I'll kill him!' Her
eyes fell on Herrick. `It was him, wasn't it?' Before the
Doctor could stop her, Leela started for Herrick, knife
poised to attack.
    Orfe looked up. `It wasn't him--it was me!'
    Leela whirled round. `You?' As she looked at Orfe's
kind, quizzical face, the feelings of affection came back for
a moment. Torn between conflicting emotions Leela stood
paralysed.
    The Doctor came and put an arm around her shoulders.
`It's all right, Leela.'
    She pulled away. `You're laughing at me,' she sobbed.
`You're all laughing at me!'
    `No, Leela.'
    `I'll smash their stupid grins off their stupid faces!'
    Herrick shouted, `Signal on tracker, two, seven.'
    `Boost and ident, Orfe.'
    `Boost and ident, sir.'
    A series of alternating high- and low-pitched beeps
filled the control room.
   `That's it!' shouted Jackson exultantly. `It's the P7E.
Keep tracking, Orfe. Lock on to her. What's the bearing?'
   `Two, four, zero, sir.'
   `Steering two, four, zero,' confirmed Tala. `Thrust on
maximum.'
   Jackson's face was alight with fanatical enthusiasm.
`This time we've got a chance. Stay on that course. Don't
lose her, Tala. Don't lose her now.'
   The Doctor did some rapid mental calculations, jumped
to his feet, and ran across to Jackson's command chair.
`Captain, listen to me...'
   Jackson waved him aside. `Not now, Doctor. Tala, don't
lose her!'
   `Jackson, course two, four, zero takes us right back into
the nebula!'
   `That's right, Doctor. If that's where the P7E is, that's
where we go.'
   `That could mean destruction!'
   `It means the end of the Quest. If P7E went in there, so
can we.'
   `But P7E didn't go in there,' shouted the Doctor
despairingly. `She couldn't have! She must have been there
from the very beginning. The nebula formed around her.'
   `How do you know?'
   `It's elementary physics--the still centre of the raging
storm. She may be in there, and she may be safe--but if
you try to reach her, it'll mean your own destruction.'
   `If P7E is in there, then we must find her,' said Jackson
calmly. `That is our purpose--destruction is a chance we
take. The Quest is the Quest.'
   Jackson was quite serious. The long years of searching
had made him totally obsessional. If tracking down the
P7E meant deliberate suicide, he would steer his ship to
destruction in the calm conviction that he was only doing
his duty.
   `Jackson, I can't allow that!'
   `You can't allow it, Doctor? You have no choice.'
Jackson nodded to Herrick, and as the Doctor bent to
uncouple K9, Herrick tackled him from behind, a forearm
like an iron bar across his windpipe.
   `K9, stop!' gasped the Doctor.
   Leela drew her knife. `You! Let the Doctor go.'
   Jackson was already covering her with his blaster.
`Don't move!'
   There was a moment of tense silence, broken by K9's
plaintive voice. `Query stop. Stop what? Please amplify
instruction.'
   `Doctor, tell it we're going on,' ordered Jackson.
   Herrick's arm tightened.
   `We're going on, K9,' croaked the Doctor.
   Jackson gave a nod of satisfaction. `Herrick, strap these
two into their couches.'
   Herrick released the Doctor, stepped back and drew his
blaster. `Quickly, you two.'
   The Doctor and Leela were bustled to a spare
acceleration couch on the command deck and strapped
into place.
   `Right.' snapped Jackson. `Everyone back to their
stations. Tala. don't lose that signal!'
   On the vision screen, the nebula grew steadily larger.
   The Doctor watched it despairingly. It was ironic, he
thought. His efforts to pull the TARDIS free of the nebula
had landed him on a space ship with a crew of lunatics
heading determinedly towards it.
   The Doctor saw a swarm of tiny objects swirling about
the fringes of the nebula. `Jackson, look out! We're heading
straight into a meteor swarm.' Almost immediately there
was a series of clangs and thumps as meteorites began
slamming into the hull. If a really big one hit them...
   `Shields up!' ordered Jackson. Heavy metal shields
began sliding across the viewing-port. The ship reeled and
shook under the continuous impact of the meteorites. It
was like being inside a tin can with someone throwing
stones at the outside. Throwing, and hitting...
   `Jackson, this is hopeless,' yelled the Doctor.
   Leela leaned forward, shouting above the din `What's
happening?'
   `We're being sucked through the outer meteorite layer.
The meteorites are smashing us to pieces.'
   `What did you say, Doctor?'
   Everything went absolutely quiet.
   `They're smashing us to--'
   The Doctor broke off, his voice loud in the sudden
silence.
   `They are?' asked Leela, puzzled.
   The Doctor sat quiet, trying to work out what was
happening. He could hear the signal from the P7E, fading,
fading...
   `Damage report?' asked Jackson calmly.
   Tala looked up. `I think we've lost right and left
auxiliaries.'
   `And the solar sail, plus all external antennae,' said Orfe.
   `Hull's taken a battering,' said Herrick. `Sealer pumps
are still working though.'
   Tala completed the report. `Main drive positive, on
course and holding, all major systems functional.'
   `Then we go on. Raise the heat shields, Tala, and take
her on manual.'
   Slowly the metal shields slid back, everyone waiting to
see what they would reveal.
   There was an astonished silence. Through the viewing-
port they saw not the fiery nebula, not even the blackness
of space. They saw a wall of rocks.
                     Chapter Five
                     Buried Alive
Tala was calling out instrument readings. `Signal fading,
sir. Forward visibility nil. We're losing acceleration.'
   `Full boost on both motors.'
   A grinding roar of power, as the ship's drive was
strained to its limits.
   `Full power, sir. But we're still slowing down.'
   The steady double beat of the P7E faded still further,
and became silent. `Signal going... signal gone...' said Tala.
`Acceleration lost... we're drifting... all major systems still
functional...'
   Jackson hammered a fist down on his console. `Then why
aren't we moving?'
   `Don't you know?' said the Doctor quietly.
   `You do, I suppose?'
   `What's your normal hull thickness?'
   `Three metres twenty.'
   The Doctor raised his voice. `K9, what's our present
hull thickness?'
   `Hull thickness seventy metres--increasing.'
   `Seventy metres!' repeated Jackson unbelievingly.
   `We're being buried alive in the heart of a new-born
world.'
   `That's impossible!'
   `No, it's not impossible, Jackson,' said the Doctor
wearily. `Simply gravity. Elementary physics, remember?
This ship is a large heavy object, surrounded by lumps of
smaller, lighter material. Our gravitational pull is stronger
than theirs. We attract them, they stick to us. The heavier
we get, the faster we grow. It all snowballs. We're being
buried, barnacled by meteorites. We're being turned into a
planet!'
   The Minyan patrol ship drifted silently through space.
It no longer resembled any kind of space craft. It was a
huge floating ball of rock, almost indistinguishable from
the meteorites surrounding it.
   `Still,' said the Doctor cheerfully, `if it wasn't for our
protective layer of debris, the meteorites would have
smashed us to smithereens long ago. Can't have
everything, can you?'
   `Look at him,' shouted Herrick. `He's laughing at us!'
   `Is there any way out, Doctor?' asked Jackson.
   `I don't known... You could try using the laser cannon.'
   `Of course, we'll blast a tunnel and force our way out on
ion drive!' Jackson swung round. `Tala, do we have the
power?'
   `It would take up all our reserve, Captain. It could blow
the drive units.'
   `It's either that or be stuck here for eternity.' Jackson
came to a decision. `We'll try it. Herrick, fire both laser
cannons full power.'
   Herrick gave him a dubious look, and reached for the
laser controls. `Fire one! Fire two!' There was a kind of
muffled boom, and the red glare of the laser beams filled
the control room.
   The rock wall beyond the viewing-ports remained
unchanged.
   K9's voice cut into the tense silence. `Hull thickness,
ninety metres, increasing... ninety-five metres, increasing.'
   `Carry on firing, Herrick,' said the Doctor calmly.
   Herrick looked at Jackson, who hesitated, then nodded.
Again there came the roar of the cannon, and the red glare
of the laser beams.
   The needles on Tala's instruments were quivering in the
red danger sector. `The forward hull's buckling, sir!
   `Carry on, Herrick,' ordered the Doctor.
   Herrick fired again,
   `Stop it,' screamed Tala. `We're melting our own hull!'
    `Carry on, Herrick,' said the Doctor implacably. `Keep
firing--it's our only chance!'
    Herrick fired again and again until the laser controls
erupted into sparks and smoke beneath his hands. `It's no
use--the cannons are disintegrating!'
    The electronic voice of K9 reported, `Hull thickness,
one hundred metres.' Suddenly it rose to a higher note.
`Penetration--you have penetration!'
    `Now, Tala,' shouted Jackson.
    Tala thrust the power-controls to maximum. There was
a roar of tortured engines as the ship juddered, vibrated
and broke free. The wall of meteorites was gone. In its
place an enormous grey sphere filled the viewing-port.
    Jackson stared at it in astonished fascination. `What is
it, Doctor?'
    `That's your P7E.'
    `Power reserves exhausted, Captain,' reported Tala.
    Jackson didn't seem to hear her. `What do you mean,
Doctor, the P7E? That's a planet!'
    `It's where your signal was coming from, all the same.'
    `Where?'
    `Right in the middle of it. The planet must have actually
formed around it.'
    Tala raised her voice. `Captain, the power's gone.'
    `That's it then,' said Jackson dully. `There's nothing else
we can do.'
    Leela watched the grey planet zoom closer, filling the
entire viewing-port. `Are we going to crash?'
    The Doctor nodded. `At full speed. Sit down, everyone!'
    Obediently the crew returned to their acceleration
couches and strapped themselves in.
    They waited in tense silence. In a calm electronic voice
K9 began counting off the seconds to their doom. `Impact
in eleven seconds. Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four,
three, two, one...'
The Minyan space ship sped through the thin atmosphere
surrounding the planet, and headed for the level grey
surface like a dart hurled at the ground. It struck the
surface of the planet at maximum speed--and disappeared
silently beneath it.
The Doctor opened his eyes. `It's all right, Leela, you can
look now.'
    Leela opened her eyes and looked around, wondering
why she was still alive.
    The Doctor raised his voice. `Relax, everyone. We've hit
a soft planet, one still in process of formation. With any
luck only the planetary core will be really solid--and this
stuff should slow us down so we don't hit it with much of a
bang.'
    `We are two hundred and fifty kilometres below
planetary surface,' reported K9. `Speed decreasing.'
    The danger over, Jackson's one obsessive interest came
to life again. `Orfe, the signal. See if you can find the
signal.'
    Orfe adjusted a control and the strange double beat
filled the control room again, louder and clearer than
before. `That's it,' he shouted. `Contact!'
    `We've found it,' breathed Jackson. `The P7E at last!'
    The Doctor looked at Leela. `Fascinating, isn't it? The
Quest and nothing but the Quest!'
    Orfe was using the communicator. `Minyan
Patrol Vessel to P7E... Minyan Patrol Vessel to P7E...'
    There was no reply. `They must hear us,'
muttered Jackson. `We're right on top of them!'
    There was a jarring crash, and everything went black.
                     Chapter Six
                     The Trogs
The crashed space ship was jammed into the heart of the
planet like a dart hurled into an ant-heap.
   The network of interlinked tunnels which honey-
combed the planetary core had been destroyed at the point
of impact, and there were cracks and subsidences and roof-
falls in the area all around. Like terrified ants, swarms of
scrawny, under-sized, ragged men and women ran to and
fro through the tunnels, screaming with fear.
   `The sky! The sky is falling.'
   `It's all coming down on us...'
   `Run... run...'
   To these people, the network of branching tunnels was
the world, its roof the sky. Here they were born, here they
toiled away their short, miserable lives, and here they died,
to be replaced by others of the same kind.
   Even so, they had their dreams, their legends. Stories
that life had not always been like this, prophecies that one
day they would escape, through the sky, to the stars--
whatever they were.
   But such talk was forbidden, to be discussed only in
whispers in the crowded darkness of the sleeping-caves.
Meanwhile they toiled and died, obeying the Guards, who
were ruled by the Seers, who were servants of the Oracle.
Rebels were dealt with swiftly and mercilessly--the Sword
of Sacrifice awaited anyone who questioned the established
order.
   There had been a particularly severe rock-fall in one of
the main tunnels, not far from the crash area. A whole
section of roof had come down, obliterating an entire
family who had been working together, as was the custom.
Now they were all buried beneath the rock-pile, the wife
and the two daughters. There were two survivors, father
and son, who had been chipping at the rock a little apart
from the others.
   The father was called Idmon, a wizened, balding man,
dressed in the brief, ragged smock that all the tunnel
workers wore. His son, Idas, was still wiry and strong,
though in a very few years he would become a replica of his
father. Men aged fast in the tunnels.
   The two men were scrabbling frantically, hopelessly at
the rock-pile that had buried their loved ones, choking in
the powdered rock-dust that filled the air. They were
sobbing as they worked, the tears making little streaks in
their grime-covered faces. A huddled group of their fellow-
workers stood watching them apathetically.
   Idmon straightened up from his hopeless task, and
turned on the watchers. `Help us, damn you--help us!'
   `They won't help, father,' said Idas wearily. `Don't waste
your breath!'
   Life in the tunnels didn't encourage the nobler
qualities. The struggle to survive took up all your
strength--there was none to spare for helping others. The
watchers turned away, ignoring the old man's appeal.
   Idmon shook his skinny fist at them. `Then may the sky
fall on you! May the sky fall on your families!'
   `Father, no,' shouted Idas. `The Guards will hear!' Any
reference to Skyfalls, actual or possible, was strictly
forbidden.
   Idmon was beside himself with rage and grief. `May the
sky fall on your loved ones, as it has on mine!' he
screamed.
   `Please, father, just dig!'
   Idmon began scrabbling frantically at the rockpile. `My
children,' he sobbed. `My children...'
   High in the tunnel wall, a remote control camera
studied the scene with its single crystal eye.
In a steel-walled control room, the camera's eye view was
reproduced on a monitor screen, one of a bank that filled
most of one wall.
   Two sinister black-clad figures entered the room. They
wore pointed hoods, eyes gleaming evilly through the slits.
Their appearance was deliberately designed to be
terrifying. They were Senior Guards, and their task was to
maintain order in the tunnels. They pulled off their hoods,
revealing heavy brutal faces.
   The spy-cameras were one of the Guards' most
important weapons, Anything that happened in the
tunnels could be seen and heard in this central control
room. If necessary, a squad of Guards was despatched to
deal with any emergency.
   The wall to the left of the monitor bank bore a huge
electronic chart of the tunnel system. It looked like an
enormous tree, with the great main tunnel the trunk,
smaller ones branches and twigs. The chart was constantly
being altered as new tunnels were built, and old ones
closed down. So vast was the network that it was
impossible to monitor it all at once. The Guards
maintained a kind of random scan, hoping that any trouble
would reveal itself sooner or later. The Guard began
punching up random shots of the tunnels.
   This particular Guard was called Tarn; his colleague's
name was Rask. Both were big, powerful men, very
different from the wizened tunnel workers. They regarded
the `Trogs', as they called them, as little better than
animals, necessary evils to be kept constantly under
control. Trogs didn't use the regeneration process to
prolong their lives. They were weak and ignorant and
ragged, creatures to be despised.
   It never occurred to Tarn or Rask or any of the other
Guards that generations of ill-treatment had made the
Trogs what they were. Guards took it for granted that the
Trogs obeyed them--just as they themselves obeyed the
Seers, and the Seers obeyed the Oracle, who ruled over all.
   Tarn looked up from the monitor. `Skyfall on Eight --
and a Trog making trouble.'
   Rask was studying the wall chart. Sections of the design
were flickering to designate damaged tunnels. Others were
dark, where tunnels had been closed down. He turned and
glanced at the monitor. `Many dead?'
   `Not enough,' said Tarn brutally. `There were two more
births yesterday, they breed like animals. What we need is
a good sacrifice. Trogs always work better after a sacrifice!'
   Rask put on his hood. `Maybe you're right. I'll take out a
patrol and pickup that troublemaker.'
   A few minutes later he was leading a squad of hooded
figures through the tunnels.
Inside the crashed patrol vessel, things were getting back
to normal. The dim emergency lights were on, and
everyone had picked themselves up, none the worse except
for a collection of bruises. The Doctor and Leela had been
released, their prisoner status forgotten. Now they were all
gathered expectantly in the short corridor to the airlock,
the Minyans in surface patrol suits.
   `Everything's ready, sir,' reported Orfe.
   `Right. Open up.'
   The airlock door slid open--to reveal a wall of solid
rock.
   The Doctor examined it. `Igneus haematite by the look
of it--we must have reached the core of the planet.'
   Leela struggled to remember her recently acquired
scientific education. `I thought you told me planets had fire
in the middle.'
   `Did I? Well, old planets like Earth maybe, but new
ones like this sometimes have a molten slurry around a
solid core. We're on the very edge of creation here, Leela, a
place of cosmic experiment. All the laws of science may be
in a state of flux!'
   Leela sighed. As usual, the Doctor's explanation left her
no wiser.
   The Doctor prodded the rock wall. `All we need to do
now is burrow our way out of here.'
   `How, Doctor?' asked Jackson helplessly. `The ship's
power system is self-regenerating--it will re-charge itself
from the radiation of the planet. But that will take time. At
the moment we've no power, no energy-source at all.'
   `Oh, I don't know about that,' said the Doctor
cheerfully. `What about the shield guns?'
   Jackson frowned, annoyed that he hadn't thought of this
himself. The shield guns had an almost inexhaustible
atomic power pack in the butt. `Yes, of course. Herrick, get
the shield guns, right away!'
The rock pile was so huge it would have taken days to clear
it away. By now anyone underneath it was certainly dead.
Idmon had realised the hopelessness of his task and had
given up. Crazed with grief and rage, he was again
haranguing the little group around him, ignoring the
terrified Idas's attempts to shut him up.
   `You all know we're slaves to the Guards,' he shouted.
`The Guards are slaves to the Seers, the Seers to the Oracle.
We're all slaves. But we know the answer, don't we? We all
know the answer because it was prophesied long ago.
Escape!' He pointed upwards. `Escape to the stars!'
   A harsh voice shouted, `Now!' and hooded figures
sprang from the shadows. Idmon's audience screamed and
fled in terror, while Idmon himself was seized and borne to
the ground.
   Idas moved to help him, but Idmon screamed, `No,
Idas--run!'
   Idas turned and fled.
   `After him!' screamed Rask.
   Idas scrambled up the rock pile, two Guards close
behind him. There was a tiny gap at the top, and Idas
wriggled through with ease. It took the bulkier Guards
some time to follow, and by the time they were through the
gap, Idas was disappearing round a bend in the tunnel.
They set off after him.
   Rask jabbed Idmon in the ribs with a booted foot.
   `Heresy, treason, incitement to escape. Quite a list.'
Idmon glared defiantly at the hooded figure above him.
   `My son's a fugitive, my wife and daughters are dead.
What more can you do to me now?'
   Rask kicked him again. `On your feet, Trog. You know
the penalty for your crimes. The Sword of Sacrifice awaits
you.'
Idas fled through the tunnels, a hooded figure close behind
him. He had managed to lose one Guard, but the other was
fitter, more persistent, and more cunning. Nothing Idas
could do seemed to shake him off.
    Idas ran on, gasping for breath, determined not to
surrender. Better a quick death by blaster bolt than the
long-drawn-out ordeal of the Sacrifice.
    He came to an open space where two tunnels met, and
sprinted desperately for cover.
    The Guard raised his blaster. `Stop, Trog, or I'll fire.'
    Idas ran on. The Guard fired and a green flash lit up the
gloom of the tunnel. Idas screamed and fell, rolling over
and over, clutching his right leg. He slammed against the
wall and lay still.
    The Guard moved towards him.
    Suddenly Idas sprang to his feet, and staggered into the
nearest tunnel at a limping run.
    Before the astonished Guard could fire again, he had
disappeared into the darkness.
    The Guard used the communicator in the butt of his
blaster. `Suspect sighted on Eight, moving into Nine. In
pursuit.'
    He moved off purposefully down the tunnel after Idas.
The Trog was wounded now, and that would slow him
down.
    He was as good as dead.
                   Chapter Seven
                   Skyfall on Nine
The Doctor and Herrick were wrangling over the shield
gun.
   `No, no, no,' said the Doctor. `Hold it like this, and aim
there--that's the weak point.'
   Herrick looked at Jackson, who nodded wearily. `Better
do as he says.'
   Herrick raised the gun and fired, and the centre of the
rock-wall melted away. He peered cautiously through the
ragged hole. `We're through to the other side, Captain.
Looks like a cavern or a tunnel or something.'
   He set off through the gap, and Jackson followed. They
clambered through to the other side, and looked around.
They were in a long gloomy tunnel carved from reddishly
glowing rock, stretching away into the distance on either
side. Dim working lights gleamed at intervals in the walls,
and here and there oddly shaped crystalline outcrops
reflected their glow.
   Close to where they were standing, and in several other
places, the tunnel was partly blocked by huge chunks of
rubble where sections of the roof seemed to have caved in.
   Herrick ran his hand along the tunnel wall. `None of
this lot's natural, sir. It's all been hacked out of solid rock.'
   `Hacked out by whom, or what, I wonder?' Jackson
looked up at the ceiling, and saw something metallic
sliding down a rail set high in the wall. `Get down,
Herrick!'
   They crouched behind the rubble, and the device glided
smoothly by, disappearing into the gloom.
   `It's all right, sir,' whispered Herrick. `It's moving on.
Do you think it was looking for us?'
   `It was looking for someone,' said Jackson grimly. `Well,
at least we know the planet's inhabited. We'd better go
back in the ship.'
   The others were still waiting in the airlock-corridor and
there was a babble of questions.
   Jackson said, `We've found tunnel workings and a
surveillance system, so we know that whatever life there is
here is intelligent. We must be on guard.'
   `Oh, get on with it, Jackson,' said the Doctor
impatiently.
   The other crew members gave him reproving looks as
Jackson went on. `Our objective is to locate the P7E and
remove the Race Bank cylinders to a place of safety. The
Quest is the Quest.'
   `The Quest is the Quest,' chanted the crew dutifully.
   `Herrick, issue the shield guns. Orfe, Tala, silent
routine.'
   Herrick went out first, and Jackson ushered the others
through the airlock. When the Doctor and Leela reached
the door, Jackson said, `No, Doctor, not you.'
   `The Quest is the Quest!' said the Doctor hopefully.
   `Our quest, Doctor, not yours.'
   The Doctor stepped back. `You're quite right,' he said
meekly, and closed the airlock door behind Jackson.
   Leela tugged at his sleeve. `Doctor, this is our chance.'
   `What chance?'
   `They've all gone. Why don't we just unplug K9, get
back in the TARDIS and go on our way?'
   In some ways it was the obvious course, realised the
Doctor, and he hadn't considered it for a moment. `What,
and leave all these people in the lurch?'
   `We don't owe them anything. Let them look after
themselves.'
   `Go away never knowing how things turned out? I'm
surprised at you, Leela. Don't you want to know what
happened to the P7E?'
   Leela sighed in resignation as the Doctor opened the
airlock door, and led the way through the gap.
   They emerged into the tunnel and stood looking about
them. `Welcome to the Underworld,' said the Doctor. His
voice echoed eerily through the darkness.
   Leela shivered. It was dark and gloomy, the air was
musty and the tunnel seemed to stretch away for ever. She
could just see the Minyan crew in the distance. `I suppose
we're going to follow them?'
   `Of course.'
   `What about K9?'
   `Oh, he'll be all right. He's building up his strength,
regenerating his energy-banks, like the ship itself.'
   `How? There's no power source here.'
   The Doctor tapped the wall. `Oh yes there is.
Radiation!'
   `Radiation? That's lucky, isn't it, Doctor?'
   `Of course it isn't! Igneous rock core, new planet, bound
to be radiation. Luck! Physics isn't luck, Leela. Physics is
fact.' The Doctor paused, considering. `Or should that be
physics are fact? Is fact, are fact, never mind! Why do you
think these tunnels were dug out?'
   `I don't know.'
   `Energy! We're in a kind of giant mine. Whoever
inhabits this planet uses the rock for fuel. Food, too, I
shouldn't wonder. You can't survive on a new planet with a
soul full of hope and fresh air, you know. Did I ever tell
you about the time I went to Aberdeen?' he went on
chattily.
   `What? Oh yes, the Granite City.'
   `That's right. Do you know, the people of Aberdeen
absorb more radiation from the granite than people who
work every day in nuclear power plants?'
   `Is that good?'
   `Well, of course it is! It proves that organisms can adapt
to all sorts of environments, even ones like this with a high
radiation content.'
   Leela heard the patter of footsteps coming towards
them. `Look out,' she whispered, and pulled the Doctor
into shelter behind some rubble,
   A thin ragged figure appeared out of the darkness, and
shot past them at a limping run, disappearing into the gap
that led to the airlock.
   `He moved like a wounded animal,' whispered Leela.
`Why was he so frightened?'
   `Let's go and ask him.' The Doctor started to rise, but
Leela pulled him down.
   `No, wait. The hunters are coming.'
   A group of sinister-looking hooded figures ran out of
the darkness.
   Their leader looked round. `He can't be far. Check those
fallen rocks, over by that gap.'
   The Doctor could see, though as yet the Guards could
not, that the hunted man was crouched panting just inside
the gap. The Guards would see him soon, and he was too
exhausted to run. And if they found the fugitive, they
would find the ship...
   He tapped Leela on the shoulder, stood up, and gave a
piercing whistle. The Guards swung round. The Doctor
and Leela pelted off down the tunnels, leading the hunters
away from their quarry.
   `Aliens! After them!' screamed the leader. The Guards
tore down the tunnel.
   Idas got painfully to his feet and clambered through the
gap. Before him was a kind of steel door. He pushed it
open, clambered through, staggered a few paces and
collapsed, exhausted. The Doctor and Leela ran on. It
wasn't long before the pursuing Guards began to overhaul
them. They were strong, fit men for all their size, and they
were far more accustomed to the tunnels than the two they
were chasing.
   The Doctor and Leela rounded a bend in the tunnel and
found themselves in a kind of loading bay. A recess in the
wall held a line of simple dump-trucks, and tracks led away
into the darkness of a side tunnel.
   The Doctor held up the heavy plastic sheeting over a
half-empty truck and motioned to Leela. `Quick, get
inside.'
   Leela scrambled into the truck and the Doctor climbed
in after her, pulling the plastic sheet to cover them. They
crouched down, waiting.
   A sharp bit of rock dug into the Doctor's knee and he
shifted position. `Keep still,' hissed Leela fiercely. She was
completely motionless, like a hunted animal in a thicket.
   They heard footsteps come closer, closer and then stop.
There was a murmur of voices--their hunters had stopped
for a conference.
   `Oh, for a force-weapon,' breathed Leela. `If we had one
of those shield guns...'
   `Ssh! Listen!' whispered the Doctor.
   One voice, obviously that of the squad leader, cut
through a babble of discussion. `Well, they're not here, are
they? Must have dodged us and doubled back. These damn
Trogs know the tunnels like the back of their hands.'
   `I'm not so sure they were Trogs,' objected another
voice. `Did you see the size of them, and the way they were
dressed ?'
   `Well, whatever they were, there are ways of dealing
with them.' The voice changed its tone. `Security? Rask
here. We're getting nowhere, not enough men. We're
clearing out. I want Nine closed down, main and ancillary
workings. Stand by for fumigation, as soon as we're clear.'
The voice changed again. `All right, let's get moving--
unless you want to be fumigated!'
   The footsteps moved away. A minute or two later, the
Doctor scrambled out of the truck. `Fumigation? I don't
like the sound of that. They're going to smoke us out like
badgers. Come on, Leela, we'd better get back into the
ship. We left the door open!'
    They began moving back the way they had come,
keeping a wary eye out for Guards. They reached the main
tunnel, and the gap in the wall without incident. Soon trey
were going through the airlock and back into the ship.
    Suddenly Leela pointed downwards. `Look, Doctor,
blood!' A scattered line of dots led down the corridor.
    Leela drew her knife, and began following the trail. She
turned the corner, caught sight of a crouching figure and
sprang, bearing her opponent to the floor. They struggled,
but Leela soon realised her opponent was putting up only
the feeblest resistance. Pinning him down with one hand
she held her knife to his throat. `Surrender or die!'
    `No... no...' croaked a feeble voice.
    The Doctor came running up. `Get off him, Leela,
you're terrifying the poor fellow!'
    `I am?' Leela released her victim and got up. He didn't
seem much of a foe when you got a good look at him. A
skinny, undersized youth dressed in tattered rags, with an
ugly wound in his right thigh.
    `He's wounded, poor chap,' said the Doctor gently. `He
is the one we saw running away.'
    Their captive was still, crouched quivering on the floor,
evidently expecting immediate execution. The Doctor put
a hand on his thin shoulders and gently eased him to a
sitting position against the wall. `It's all right, old chap,
we're your friends.'
    The man looked wonderingly at the Doctor, then
cowered back at the sight of Leela standing over him, knife
in hand.
    The Doctor said, `She won't hurt you. She's a friend,
too. Her name is Leela.'
    `She is strong and fierce,' muttered the man. `Like the
Guards.'
    The Doctor was examining the wound on the man's leg.
    `It is bad?' asked Leela.
   `Bad enough. Fetch me the medikit from the command
deck, will you, Leela? White box with a red circle on it, in
a wall bracket behind the main control console.'
   Leela hurried off muttering, `White box with red circle.
White box with red circle.'
   The Doctor sat on his heels next to the wounded man.
`What's your name?'
   `Idas.'
   `Hello, Idas. I'm the Doctor. Are you frightened?'
   Idas nodded silently.
   `Don't be,' said the Doctor gently. `I told you--we're
friends.'
Meanwhile the Minyan party had been marching steadily
along the seemingly endless tunnel. They rounded a bend
and found themselves at a junction point where the tunnel
divided.
   The party came to a halt. `These tunnels could stretch
on for miles,' said Jackson wearily, `The P7E must be at the
end of one of them--but which?'
   `We could split up, sir,' suggested Orfe. `Form two
parties, take one tunnel each.'
   `Too dangerous. What if we run into trouble? We're few
enough as it is.' Jackson thought for a moment. Herrick
was the boldest and most resourceful of the little party,
though his natural truculence might lead him into trouble.
`Herrick, go and scout down the left-hand tunnel. Look
out for any signs of life. If you find anything promising,
come back and let us know. If you run into trouble, come
back even quicker. And don't get lost!'
   Herrick grinned confidently, pleased to be chosen for
the mission. `Don't worry, sir, I've got the markers.' He
took an adhesive metal disc from a belt pouch and slapped
it on the rocks where the tunnel divided. Shield gun held
before him, he moved warily down the tunnel.
   Jackson turned to the others. `Tala, Orfe, you'd better
get some rest. Break out the emergency rations.'
   All three produced food-concentrate tablets from their
belts and found seats on the rubble. They sat resting,
looking round uneasily, waiting for Herrick to return.
Herrick marched down the tunnel with his usual cheerful
confidence. Before very long, he came to another junction.
He stuck on a marker, chose left at random, and went on.
He found another junction and yet another. This whole
area seemed honey-combed. Herrick decided the
inhabitants of this strange underworld must have been
mining, following some particular mineral seam as it
twisted and turned through the rock. He made yet another
left turn and found he was looking at one of his own
markers. He had been going round in a circle.
   He turned to retrace his steps--and found himself
facing a hooded figure with a blaster.
   A harsh voice ordered, `Stop, Trog, or I'll fire!'
   Herrick kept moving. `Who the blazes are you?'
   `Stop, Trog!'
   `Don't you Trog me,' said Herrick indignantly. He took
another step forward.
   The hooded figure raised its weapon and fired.
                   Chapter Eight
                    The Smoke
Herrick brought up his own weapon at the same moment,
but not to fire it. He simply held the shield gun in front of
him. The Guard's own maser beam was reflected straight
back on him, killing him instantly.
    Herrick gave a grunt of satisfaction, moved forward and
picked up the man's gun, examining it curiously. To his
astonishment a tinny voice came from the butt.
    `Guard Klimt! Guard Klimt! Clear Tunnel Nine
Complex, clear Tunnel Nine Complex. It is being closed
for fumigation. Guard Klimt, come in please!'
    Herrick found the communicator button and pressed it.
`Guard Klimt has just retired--suddenly!'
    There was a pause and the astonished voice said, `Who
is that? Identify yourself.'
    `This is Trog Herrick here! Who are you?'
In the security area Tarn looked up at Rask, who had just
returned from his unsuccessful hunt for Idas. `He says he's
a Trog--and he's armed. Close down Complex Nine for
fumigation--now!'
   Rask moved to a nearby console and began operating
controls, `Complex Nine closing down.'
   Tarn watched him, worried. Armed, organised revolt by
the Trogs was the one thing he and his kind had always
feared. So far it had never happened. There had only been
the occasional solitary rebel, like Idmon, now a prisoner
awaiting sacrifice.
   Fumigation was one of the Guards' main weapons in
keeping the Trogs under control. Any of the tunnels could
be closed off by steel shutters and flooded with gas from a
series of vents in the walls. The ostensible purpose was to
keep the tunnels free of disease. In reality, fumigation was
a way of reminding any potential troublemakers that their
lives were in the hands of the Guards.
   Tarn remembered the cheerful, arrogant voice that had
come over the communicator. `That was no Trog! A Trog
wouldn't dare attack a Guard and take his gun--and as for
being insolent over the communicator...'
   Rask stared thoughtfully at the winking lights on the
electronic map. `Well, the two I saw in the tunnels were no
Trogs.'
   `Aliens?'
   `We still don't know what caused that Skyfall.'
   Tarn came to join him at the map. Light-bars were
appearing across Tunnel Nine, showing that the steel
shutters were sliding into place. Tarn smiled. `Well, we'll
know soon, won't we--when we find the bodies.'
Herrick was hurrying down the side tunnels, following his
markers to find his way back to the others. To his vast
relief he saw them in the distance standing at the junction
to the main tunnel. `Captain!'
   Jackson peered down the tunnel. `Herrick? Are you all
right? I thought I heard a blaster.'
   Herrick began running towards him. `Yes, I'm fine. I--'
   A steel shutter slammed across the tunnel in front of
him.
`Nine close-down completed,' reported Rask.
  Tarn studied the map for a moment. `Fumigate the
whole of Complex Nine.'
  `It's a big area,' warned Rask. `The gas will take quite
some time to build up to effective levels.'
  `That doesn't matter. We're in no hurry--are we?'
  Rask's hand reached for a main control lever. `Very
well,' he said formally. `Fumigating--now!'
Jackson gave the shutter an angry kick, and stepped
back. `Herrick, stand clear,' he yelled. He turned to Tala
and Orfe. `All right, blast it!'
   They raised their shield guns and the shutter
disappeared in an explosion of smoke and flame. A few
moments later, Herrick appeared.
   `Did you find it?' shouted Jackson. `Did you find the
P7E?'
   `No, sir. It's just a sort of maze in there--all I found was
some kind of Guard. He tried to kill me with this!' Herrick
held out the dead Guard's weapon.
   `Who was he?'
   `No idea, sir. There's a communicator built into that
thing. It called him Guard Klimt.'
   Jackson took the gun and examined it. `Minyan design.
Must have been looted from the P7E.'
   `What do we do now, sir?' asked Tala.
   `Go on with the Quest, of course.'
   As they moved off down the other branch of the tunnel,
Orfe paused. `I thought I heard something, sir. A kind of
hissing...'
   Tala pointed. `Look, Captain!'
   Swirls of vapour were drifting down the tunnel towards
them.
Leela was looking on while the Doctor cleaned the wound
on Idas's leg. `That's better. It shouldn't take long now.'
   `Are you a Seer?'
   `A what? No, I'm the Doctor. Soon be finished, old
chap.' The Doctor rummaged in the medikit and produced
a couple of aerosol sprays. He used the first to sterilise the
wound, and the second to spray a fine layer of plasti-skin
over the area. `Leela, just go and unplug K9 for me, will
you?'
   `I've just been all the way up to the command deck for
your medikit box.'
   `Linked up like that, K9's supervising the working of
the whole ship.' Suddenly the lights returned to their
normal brightness. The Doctor looked up. `You see? The
ship's recharging its energy-banks. It can look after itself
now. Tell K9 to concentrate on his own re-charging, I shall
need him soon.'
   `All right, Doctor, I'll go and unplug K9,' said Leela.
She hurried away.
   The Doctor sprayed a final layer of plasti-skin on Idas's
wound. Idas winced. `Stings, does it?' said the Doctor
cheerfully. `That's good, shows it's working!'
   Idas straightened his leg. There was very little sign of
the wound by now, and it had almost stopped hurting. `Are
you a Seer?' he asked again.
   `No, Idas, just a traveller.'
   `Where from? Where do you come from?'
   `From the sky!'
   `You lie!' said Idas fiercely. `There is nothing but chaos
above the sky.'
   `Oh, very well then, from the stars.'
   Idas stared at him in awe. `My father talked about the
stars. There is an old prophecy among the slaves, handed
on for generations. It says that one day gods will come
from the stars to set us free. Are you a god?'
   The Doctor smiled wryly, remembering his people's
intervention on Minyos. `No, Idas,' he said gently. `I'm not
a god. But I'd still like to help you if I can. Could you take
me to your father?'
   Sadly, Idas shook his head. `It is not possible.'
   `Why not?'
   `When the Skyfall happened, all my family were buried.
My father became crazed and spoke against the Guards, so
they took him away.'
   `What will happen to him?'
   `They will sacrifice him to the Oracle. There is nothing
anyone can do.' There was the resignation of generations of
slavery in Idas's voice.
   `Oh, isn't there?' said the Doctor indignantly. `We'll see
about that! Try to stand up.'
   Idas got to his feet, and found to his astonishment that
his leg would bear his weight without hurting.
   Leela came hurrying along the corridor. `I have
unplugged K9, Doctor. He says his re-charging is almost
complete.'
   `Splendid! This is Idas, Leela.'
   `Hullo, Idas,' said Leela. Idas shrank away, still not
convinced she wasn't dangerous.
   `They're going to sacrifice his father,' explained the
Doctor.
   `Look, Doctor!' shouted Leela.
   The Doctor and Idas turned. A cloud of white vapour
was drifting down the corridor towards them.
   `It is the Smoke,' screamed Idas. `You have brought me
into a trap to kill me.' He lunged at the Doctor's throat and
they fell together into the cloud.
   Leela jumped into the gas after them, trying to pull the
Doctor free. There was a brief flurry of arms and legs, and
after a moment the Doctor surfaced, dragging an
unconscious Idas after him. Leela followed. Coughing and
choking they retreated down the corridor.
   The Doctor shoved Idas towards Leela. `Get him to the
command deck, you'll be all right there for a while.' He
began wrapping the folds of his scarf over his mouth and
nose.
   Leela stared at him. `Where are you going, Doctor?'
   `Outside to try to do something about this gas.'
   `You'll suffocate out there! Can't you just keep it out of
the ship? If we close the airlock door...'
   `I could try--but what about all the others? They're out
in those tunnels somewhere, you know. Just get Idas to the
command deck.'
   Pulling his scarf up below his eyes, the Doctor dashed
through the wall of smoke towards the airlock.
Jackson and the others were plodding doggedly along a
smoke-filled tunnel, blasting the steel doors as they came
to them. They had their helmet-visors down and there was
an air supply in their back-packs. But the supply was
limited and already it was dangerously low.
  If they didn't find a way out of the smoke soon, they
would have to open their helmets--and the smoke would
choke them.
Protected only by his scarf, the Doctor felt his way along
the walls of the tunnel. His eyes were streaming, and he
was beginning to cough.
   The Doctor's respiratory system was far more efficient
than that of any human being, but he needed oxygen to
survive as much as anyone else.
   The gas wasn't poisonous as such; it was some kind of
fumigant smoke. But if it built up sufficiently, it would
asphyxiate him all the same.
   At last he found what he was looking for--an inspection
hatch beside a smoke-pouring grille. Smoke doesn't just
move of its own accord. It has to be pumped--which meant
that somewhere there had to be a pumping station.
   The Doctor produced his sonic screwdriver, undid the
hatch fastening and lifted it off. He surveyed the tangle of
circuitry with satisfaction. `Whatever blows can be made to
suck,' he thought grimly. `If I disconnect this here, reverse
the polarity, and re-connect here...'
   Fanning the smoke away with his hat, the Doctor set to
work. It was an intricate job, and it wasn't made any easier
by the fact that his head was beginning to swim. The
circuit panels started blurring before his eyes.
   Doggedly the Doctor worked on, while the smoke in the
tunnel built up into a dense, impenetrable wall.
   He was making the final cross-connection when the
sonic screwdriver slipped from his fingers and he collapsed
unconscious.
   Smoke from the vent swirled round his head, in a thick
grey cloud.
               Chapter Nine
          The Mouth of the Dragon
As the Doctor lay unconscious, something strange
happened.
   Smoke stopped coming out of the vent, and began
rushing into it, faster and faster like water draining from a
tank. All over the Tunnel Nine area the same thing was
happening. The smoke began to clear with astonishing
speed...
In the Security section, Tarn was bowing deferentially
before his communicator console, acknowledging the
instructions of the brown-hooded figure on the screen. `I
obey immediately, Master.' There was both fear and
reverence in his voice. He turned to Rask. `We are ordered
to round up the slaves to attend the coming sacrifice.' He
broke off in horror. White smoke was pouring from all the
ventilators, filling the room...
   Tarn gave a yell of fear. `The gas--it's getting in! Shut
down the fumigation system.'
   Coughing and choking, Rask staggered to the console.
The Doctor opened his eyes and saw a wisp of gas drifting
past his eyes and into the vent. He smiled. Evidently he
had finished the job before passing out. He got to his feet,
and watched as the last few wisps of gas were whisked
away. `I wonder where it all went?' said the Doctor
thoughtfully, and went back to the ship.
   When he came on to the command deck, Idas, now
recovered, was sitting bolt upright on an acceleration
couch, obviously not daring to move. He was staring all
round him with wide, astonished eyes.
   Leela appeared from the corridor to the armoury,
proudly holding another shield gun. `I have found a
weapon, Doctor!'
    The Doctor stood staring into nothingness, lost in
thought. `Have you?' he said vaguely.
    `Well, we've got to protect ourselves somehow, haven't
we?'
    Idas looked up as Leela came towards him. `Are you
really from the stars?'
    `Yes,' said Leela matter-of-factly.
    `The stars,' breathed Idas in wonder. `They really exist
then?'
    `Of course they do!'
    Idas pointed to the metal ceiling above them. `And that
is not the sky?'
    `That is the roof,' said Leela pityingly.
    `Roof,' said Idas thoughtfully. `Will you take me with
you when you return to the stars?'
    `No,' said Leela.
    `Yes,' said the Doctor. `Or rather the owners of this ship
will--I hope! Unfortunately they've got problems.' He
looked down at K9 who was peacefully re-charging
himself. `Can't lend them you for ever, old chap, can I?'
    `Negative, Master.'
    `Why do you call this your ship?' asked Idas.
    `That's what it is,' said Leela.
    Idas shook his head. `No, no, it is a Citadel. We have a
Citadel, too.'
    `You do?' said the Doctor with sudden interest. `Where
is it?'
    `In the heart of our world. It is where the Guards and
the Seers live, in metal rooms like these.' Fear filled Idas's
voice. `We are taken there when they hold the sacrifices.
My father will be there now, waiting...'
    The Doctor stared at the guidance-system console,
thinking of the shattered crystal. The P7E and this one
were sister ships. Besides, he didn't approve of human
sacrifice. `Can you take us to this Citadel of yours?'
    `I could... but there is no time now,' said Idas
mournfully.
  `No time! Don't ever say that to me, I'm a Time Lord!'
  Leela pulled Idas to his feet. `Do not worry,' she said
consolingly. `The Doctor has saved many fathers. Come.'
Deep within the heart of the planet was another control
room, very similar to the one the Doctor had just left. Once
it had been the command deck of the P7E, though it was
many thousands of years since it had fulfilled that
function. Now it was a kind of temple, the computer
consoles and control panels draped with rich hangings,
smoky temple lamps creating an atmosphere of sinister
gloom.
   In a sub-control room adjoining the main command
deck, Idmon, the father of Idas, lay strapped to a metal
trolley, a gag in his mouth. A hooded figure stood watching
him from the doorway. It was dressed not in the universal
black of the guards but in a garment of sombre brown,
ornamented with golden studs. This was Ankh, a Seer, one
of the two supreme rulers under the Oracle. Fiery red eyes
glinted behind the slits of his hood.
   Flanking him stood Tarn and Rask. Ankh spoke in his
metallic, inhuman voice. `Assemble the slaves to witness
the sacrifice. They must be reminded who rules here. See
that they learn the lesson, Tarn, or you will be next!'
   Tarn bowed low. `Yes, Master. All shall be as you
command.'
   Ankh turned away. Rask crossed to the trolley and
glared down at Idmon. `Make the most of these few
moments, slave. They will be your last!'
   Idmon could not move because he was fastened to the
trolley, and he could not speak because he was gagged. But
as he looked up at Rask, his eyes blazed with defiance.
The Doctor, Leela and Idas moved along the tunnels, K9
trundling along behind them.
   The Doctor was questioning Idas about the social
organisation of the planet. `So the Oracle lives in the
Citadel, and tells the two Seers what to do. The Seers tell
the Guards, and the Guards tell you?'
   Idas nodded.
   Leela had been listening to the conversation. `And you
do all the work?'
   Idas said sadly, `Yes. That is how it has always been.'
   `Has no one ever thought of revolution?'
   `My father did--and now he waits for sacrifice.'
   They came to a central junction point, with tunnels
branching off on all sides. Idas hesitated, confused. `There
are so many tunnels. It is hard to be sure.'
   The Doctor had a thought. `K9, could you make us a
map of this tunnel system?'
   `Affirmative, Master.' K9's antennae extended and his
eyes lit up. He spun round in a complete circle, as if he
were chasing his own tail. Then he stayed, remained
completely still for a moment, whirring and clicking
busily.
   `What's happening?' asked Leela.
   `Sssh!'     said   the     Doctor     reprovingly.   `He's
concentrating!'
   `Ready, Master.'
   The Doctor stooped and drew a roll of paper from K9's
mouth. He held it up. `Very good, K9. Thank you. Now, I
think you'd better go and find Jackson and the others.
Bring them back here and then follow on after us, clear?'
   `Find, retrieve and follow. Affirmative, Master!' K9
spun round and glided away.
   The Doctor held up the map. `Now then, Idas, K9 has
kindly made this for us. Do you recognise it?'
   Idas bowed his head in reverence. `It is the Tree. The
Tree of Life.' The complex map with all its main and
subsidiary tunnels did look rather like a kind of tree.
   `The Tree at the End of the World,' said the Doctor
softly. `Idas, where are we?'
   Idas studied the map for a moment, then pointed.
`Here,' he said confidently.
   `Good. And where is the Citadel where they're keeping
your father?'
   Idas pointed to a squarish shape at the centre of the
map.
   `I see,' said the Doctor thoughtfully. `Now, how can we
get from where we are to the Citadel--quickly?'
   Idas hesitated. `There is a way--but it is forbidden.'
   `Why?'
   `It is guarded by invisible dragons. Not even the Guards
are allowed to use it. Only the Seers--and they have special
powers.'
   The Doctor chuckled. `So do I, Idas. So do I. Anyway,
the Tree at the End of the World is always guarded by
dragons. Fire dragons with tongues of flame!'
   Idas shuddered.
   `Do not worry,' said Leela. `The Doctor has killed
dragons before!'
Jackson and his crew were resting at yet another junction.
They felt weary and defeated. The mysterious
disappearance of the smoke had removed one danger, but
after endless searching they still hadn't managed to locate
the P7E.
   Herrick leaped to his feet, raising his shield gun.
`Something's coming--following us along the tunnel.'
   They waited tensely. A squat metallic shape rounded the
tunnel and came gliding towards them.
   `It's that robot dog of the Doctor's,' said Jackson,
amazed. `What's it doing here?'
   K9 glided to a halt. `I bring instructions from the
Doctor,' he said importantly. `You will accompany me at
once, please!'
   `Why should we go with you?' demanded Merrick
angrily. `We've got to find the P7E.'
   `I have already located the P7E. The Doctor is on the
way there now. Please follow me.'
  K9 wheeled and set off back down the tunnel. The
Minyan crew looked at each other, and then followed
obediently. There didn't seem anything else to do.
Idas led the Doctor and Leela down a short dead-end
tunnel. It ended in a wall of rock in which were set two
massive metal doors.
   The Doctor took a step forward. Idas pulled him back.
`No, Doctor, that's where the dragons live.'
   `It is, is it? Let's see if they're at home.' The Doctor took
an apple from his pocket and handed it to Leela, who took
a bite out of it.
   `Don't eat it,' ordered the Doctor. `Throw it!' Leela
tossed the apple towards the door. A lattice-work of
lightning flickered across the tunnel, reducing the apple to
charred fragments.
   The Doctor produced another apple. `Look for the
source-point this time, Leela. The mouth of the dragon.'
He tossed the apple, the lightning flickered again, and this
time Leela saw the side nozzles projecting the maser-rays.
   `Got it, Doctor.'
   `Right, give them a blast!'
   Leela raised her shield gun and blasted the nozzles, first
one side and then the other, turning them into lumps of
shapeless metal.
   `Now the door!'
   A long blast from the shield gun melted the door into
nothingness, revealing a square chasm, rather like a lift-
shaft.
   `In you go,' said the Doctor cheerfully.
   Leela went cautiously up to the edge. It was like a lift-
shaft all right--but where was the lift? All she could see
was a dizzying drop, stretching down and down. `Oh, no,
Doctor, there's nothing there!'
   `Oh yes there is. There's gravity.'
   Leela looked suspiciously at him. `Didn't you once tell
me gravity makes things fall?'
   `That's right--towards the centre. But this is a new-
born planet, Leela, on the very edge of creation. Things are
different here. We're almost at the centre of the planet.
Inside this shaft there will be zero gravity, just as in space.
That's my theory, anyway.'
   `But it's just a theory?'
   `That's right,' said the Doctor cheerfully. `So I'd better
test it!'
   He stepped over the edge of the shaft--and stood
suspended in nothingness.
   Leela turned to Idas. `Come on,' she said with
resignation, and dragged him bodily into the shaft.
   All three hung suspended in space.
   `How do we move?' asked Leela.
   The Doctor grinned. `Just push!'
   `Push?'
   The Doctor nodded. He stretched out until he could
reach the side of the shaft, pushed upwards and
immediately began drifting down. His voice floated up to
them. `Push! `
   Leela turned to Idas. `Push!' she said fiercely.
   Now all three were floating down together.
   `You all right, Idas?' called the Doctor.
   Idas nodded, paralysed with fear.
   They drifted down, down, down... It was a pleasant
enough sensation, decided Leela. But what happened when
they reached the bottom?
   Absorbed in the new sensation, none of them noticed a
spy camera set into the wall of the shaft.
On his monitor screen, Tarn watched the three figures
drifting down past the camera's field of vision. Just as he'd
suspected--aliens. Two aliens, and a traitor Trog.
   He leaned forward to the communications mike. `Gate
patrol--alert! We are being attacked by alien invaders.
Prepare an ambush.'
   Tarn sat back, well satisfied. When the invaders reached
the gates of the Citadel, they would die.
                 Chapter Ten
             The Sword of Sacrifice
In the temple which had once been a space ship,
everything was ready.
    A crowd of ragged slave workers huddled at the back of
the huge room, flanked by armed Guards.
    There was a murmur of awe as Lakh, the Seer, strode
into the temple and bowed low before the screen of
flickering light that was the visible manifestation of the
Oracle--the god whose presence pervaded the entire
temple, the one who had ruled since time began.
    Ankh came and ranged himself beside his fellow Seer,
bowing low.
    The Oracle spoke, its voice a throaty whisper filled with
infinite age and wisdom. `Is the time right?'
    Lakh bowed again. `The time is right.'
    `Is the slave ready?'
    `The slave is ready.'
    `And those who watch?'
    `They are filled with fear.'
    The questions were part of the time-hallowed ritual of
sacrifice.
    The dreadful voice whispered, `Let the sword ask its
question.'
    `It shall be done!'
    Black-hooded Guards pushed forward the trolley to
which Idmon was fastened, positioning it in the exact
centre of the temple.
    Idmon stared upwards, knowing what he would see.
Suspended above him was an enormous sword, its needle-
sharp point poised above his heart.
    The sword was suspended by a silken cord, and the cord
ran through two ring bolts in the ceiling. Suspended a little
below the tautly-stretched cord was a ceremonial oil-lamp
with a tiny naked flame.
   It only remained to wait.
   In time the cord would char and fray in the rising heat.
When the cord snapped, the sword would fall, and Idmon
would die.
   But not for some time yet. The lamp was some way
below the cord, and its flame was turned low. The longer
the wait, the greater the opportunity for the victim--and
the audience--to reflect on the folly and wickedness of
rebellion.
   Idrnon stared up at the gleaming sword-point and
thought about his son, wondering if the boy had got away.
   Lakh turned towards the watching slaves, raised his
hands and began the ritual.
   `Lamp burn, sword fall.
   Ask the question that hangs over all.'
   The crowd took up the chant. `Ask the question that
hangs over all.'
`... Eventually the flame burns through the rope, and the
sword falls,' said Idas. His face twisted in grief, as he
thought of his father.
     They were still drifting down the shaft, though the
bottom, was now in sight.
     `It is a very complicated way to kill,' said Leela. `Why go
to so much trouble?'
     `Terror,' said the Doctor simply. `Intimidation! The
more ritual and mumbo-jumbo, the greater the effect.
That's the whole point of official punishment, eh? Anyway,
you can talk, Leela. What about the Test of the Horda?'
     Leela nodded. There had been an equally complicated
and gruesome ritual on her own planet--though there, at
least, the victim did have a chance. The Doctor himself
had survived the Test, cutting a thin rope with his cross-
bow bolt in time to save himself from dropping into the pit
of savage Horda.
  She was just about to point this out. when she hit the
bottom of the shaft with a gentle bump.
  They had arrived.
Jackson, Orfe, Herrick and Tala were running along the
corridor that led to the top of the shaft.
   They paused when they saw the yawning chasm, but K9
sailed straight on, shooting over the edge of the shaft to
hang suspended in space. `Follow, please,' he piped.
`Faster. Imperative move faster!'
The Doctor, Leela and Idas came out of another short
tunnel, and found themselves facing a wide chasm,
stretching right across their path.
   It was spanned by a narrow metal bridge--and on the
other side of the bridge was the P7E.
   They could see only one side of the space ship, which
appeared to be embedded in solid rock. The bridge led
straight to its airlock, which stood invitingly open.
   The Doctor strode confidently on to the bridge. More
hesitantly, Leela and Idas followed.
   They were half-way across when black-hooded Guards
appeared in the airlock, covering them with blasters.
   They turned. More Guards had taken up positions at the
other end of the bridge.
   One stood a little apart from the Guards in the airlock,
obviously their leader. `Do not move!' he called. `You with
the weapon, throw it down.'
   `Throw it down, Leela,' said the Doctor resignedly.
Leela tossed the weapon over the bridge and it spun down
and down till it disappeared from sight.
   `Move forward,' ordered the commander. `Bring them
inside.' They shuffled forward until they reached the
airlock, where hooded Guards surrounded them.
   The commander pulled off his hood. Idas shrank back.
`Rask!'
   Rask nodded, peering into his face. `Idas, is it not?
You're just in time to follow your father. But first you shall
see him die. Bring them to the temple!'
The cord was beginning to burn through. Strand after
strand had separated, and now only a few thin threads
supported the weight of the sword.
   There was a stir as the three prisoners were thrust into
the room. Ankh said angrily, `What is the meaning of this
interruption, Rask?'
   `I have captured the aliens, Master, and the traitor,
Idas!'
   Puzzled, Ankh looked to his senior for guidance. Lakh
waved his hand, and a Guard with a long pole moved the
lamp away from beneath the cord, holding it to one side.
   `Bring them forward,' ordered Ankh.
   The captives were thrust forward. Lakh studied them.
`Aliens and traitors! They too will answer the Question of
the Sword. Let the ceremony continue!
   The Guard released the lamp, allowing it to fall back
into place. The cord was very thin now--any moment the
last few strands would be snapped by the weight of the
sword. They began to unravel...
   `No!' screamed Idas. With one frantic leap, he sprang
from the group of prisoners and shoved at Idmon's
trolley--just as the sword flashed down. It missed Idmon's
body by inches, glanced off the edge of the trolley and
clattered to the floor.
   There was a gasp of horror at this sacrilege. For a
moment no one moved--except the Doctor. He whirled
round, knocked down the nearest Guard, snatched the
man's blaster and tossed it to Leela. `Out!' he roared.
`Everybody outside! If any of you want to be free--come
with us!'
   `Kill them!' screamed Ankh. `Kill them all!'
   A Guard raised his blaster; Leela promptly shot him
down.
    There was instant pandemonium, terrified slaves
milling about the temple in their rush to get clear of the
blaster fire. A few of the bolder ones ran forward to follow
the Doctor. He snatched up the sword, cut Idmon free of
the trolley and pulled him to his feet.
    He thrust him towards Leela, who began bustling
everyone towards the door. `Move! Come on, move!' she
shouted. `Come with us, and fight for your freedom!'
    `Get them all into the tunnels, Idas,' shouted the
Doctor. `We'll never beat them here!'
    The air was full of shouts, screams and the whine of
blasters. There was so much noise and confusion now, with
slaves running in all directions, that the Guards had to aim
their fire carefully for fear of hitting each other or, worse
still, of damaging some part of the Oracle.
    The Doctor and Leela had no such problem. Leela fired
her blaster, the Doctor waved his sword menacingly.
Guards and slaves alike gave way before them. In a tightly-
packed group, the Doctor and Leela and Idas and Idmon
thrust their way towards the door, followed by a few rebel
slaves.
    `Kill them!' screamed Ankh again. `Kill them--kill
them all!'
    Rask, more practically, was speaking into his
communicator. `Gate patrol! There's a breakout. Rebel
slaves. Stop them!'
Jackson and his crew followed K9 out of the anti-gray
shaft, along the corridor--and found themselves facing the
P7E for which they had been searching so long.
   For a moment they gazed in awed silence. Then they
heard the sounds of screaming and the sizzle of blaster fire
coming from the ship.
   `There's a battle!' yelled Herrick joyfully, and ran for
the bridge.
The Doctor's little group ran down the corridor to the
airlock--straight into the advancing gate patrol. Leela
drove them back with a barrage of blaster-fire, then swung
round and aimed more blasts at the pursuing Guards.
`They've got us on both sides, Doctor,' she shouted.
   `We could try rushing them,' suggested Idas. `We must
do something!'
   `Hmm,' said the Doctor thoughtfully. He was sure there
must be a solution, but for the moment he couldn't seem to
think of it.
   Suddenly they heard the distinctive roar of a shield gun.
Herrick shot down the corridor, and opened fire on the
gate patrol. The Guards swung round to deal with the new
attacker--and Leela blasted them again.
   Now it was the gate patrol who were caught in a
crossfire, and they broke and scattered.
   Led by Leela and Herrick, the Doctor's party dashed
down the corridor and into the airlock. Leela and Herrick
stood back to let them through, and then defended their
rear with covering fire. Step by step, they fell back until
they were on the bridge--all except Herrick, who stayed in
position, covering the entrance to the airlock, protecting
their retreat.
   When everyone was across the bridge, Jackson shouted,
`Herrick! They're all across--come on!'
   Herrick was filled with the joy of battle, the kind of
berserk bloodlust that made the old Vikings fight till they
died beneath a heap of their foes. A Guard edged too far
forward in the airlock, and Herrick picked him off.
Without looking round he yelled, `I've waited a long time
for this, and I'm not missing it now. Go back, Captain.
Goodbye and good luck!'
   `Herrick, I order you--' shouted Jackson.
   Herrick wasn't listening. Crouched down on one knee
so as to get maximum cover from his shield gun, he was
methodically raking the airlock with blaster fire. Jackson
hesitated. Then with a yell of, `Goodbye, Herrick!' he ran
after the others.
   Herrick went on fighting till he was over-run. A dozen
Guards rushed him from the airlock doorway, urged on
from behind by a furious Rask. The first half-dozen died
beneath his fire but the rest leaped over the bodies of their
fellows and bore him to the ground. The butt of a blaster
thudded against his head.
   When the survivors sorted themselves out, Herrick lay
like a Viking warrior, surrounded by a ring of dead
enemies.
   Rask came out of the airlock, and stood looking down at
Herrick's body. He jabbed it in the ribs with his boot, and
Herrick moaned and stirred.
   Rask smiled. `Good. Not dead--yet! Bring him inside
for questioning!'
                   Chapter Eleven
                    The Crusher
In a disused side tunnel, an old hiding place where slaves
met for hopeless talk of rebellion, the Doctor and his party
were pausing to rest and plan. They had already exchanged
stories with Jackson and his crew.
   A small group of rebellious slaves had followed them
from the P7E. The Doctor was dressing the wounds of
their new allies with supplies from the medikits the
Minyans carried in their belts. Leela was helping him. The
slaves had suffered most in the battle. They had no means
of defending themselves, and the Guards had not hesitated
to fire whenever they got a clear shot at the crowd.
   Leela sprayed a layer of plasti-skin on to the arm of a
slave girl called Naia. `And life has always been like this for
your people?'
   We are born, live and die in the tunnels,' said Naia
simply. `There was nothing else--until now. Nothing but
the Quota.'
   `The Quota?'
   Naia picked up a fragment of rock, then threw it to the
ground. `This! Every day we must carve out so much rock
for the Crusher to feed into the Citadel.'
   `Why do they need rock?'
   `For energy, for fuel, for reprocessing into food. So we
can go on working, to get more rock--unless our lives are
ended by a Skyfall.' She laughed bitterly. `Oh, they say
they're accidents, but they're not, not all of them. They use
them to keep our numbers down. Just enough of us survive
to do the work.'
   At the end of the tunnel, Idas was staring longingly at
Jackson's shield gun. `If only we had more of these...'
   Jackson shrugged. `Even if we had, we can't use the
shaft again. They'd be ready for us. They'd wipe us out
before we got over the bridge. Is there any other route into
the ship?'
   Idas shook his head despairingly. `None that I know
of...'
   Leela moved over to the Doctor. `Doctor, Naia here says
they eat rock!'
   The Doctor nodded. `On a new planet like this, who
knows what's possible? There could well be nutrients in
the rock, and if they were processed properly...' He
grinned. `Did I ever tell you about the time I went to
Blackpool? Everyone eats rock there!'
   `Doctor, be serious.'
   The Doctor was thinking aloud. `If they process rock,
they must take it into the ship somewhere, mustn't they?'
   `Through the Crusher,' said Leela. `That's what Naia
said, anyway.'
   `Through the Crusher and into the ship.' The Doctor
looked up. `There is another way in, there has to be!'
   Suddenly he changed the subject, following a random
thought. `Why do you think Idas calls the tunnel system
the Tree of Life, Leela?'
   `Why shouldn't he? No, wait a minute... Idas has never
seen a tree, has he? So why would he call it one?'
   `The Tree of Life,' said the Doctor. `The Race Bank!
The gift of immortality, on the Tree of Life... guarded by
the dragon!'
   `Surely, Doctor, all this is just a myth, an old story?'
   `Ah, but old myths have a grain of truth in them--if you
know where to look. Do you know, Leela, everyone here
except us comes from the same racial stock as Jackson and
his crew?'
   `The same stock?'
   `How do you think they got here, in the middle of a
planet? Seers, Guards; Trogs--they're all descendants of
the people who came here on the P7E. Jackson is probably
Idas's great-great-great-great-great-grandfather a few
thousand times over! `
   `Great-great-great--' said Leela, puzzled.
   The Doctor grinned. `Don't worry about it.' He went
over to Jackson. `There is another way into the P7E, you
know.'
   `The bridge will be guarded...'
   `Ah, but what about the other side of the ship--the
goods entrance, eh? They still need food, don't they, and
they still need fuel, and the rock has to go in somewhere.'
   The Doctor beamed. `Come on, everyone, let's get
moving. You lead the way, Idas. Oh, and bring the sword.
I've had an idea...'
   Before they realised what was happening the Doctor was
bustling them off.
Some time later, after a long and wearying journey through
the tunnels, they stood hiding in the entrance to an open
area criss-crossed with tracks and filled with dump-trucks.
They were watching a gang of weary slaves shove a rock-
filled dump-truck along a single-line track.
    The track ran up to a rock wall and disappeared into a
gaping mouth, from behind which came the sinister
grinding sound of the Crusher.
    The slaves wheeled the truck to the opening and tipped
the load of rocks through the hole. They pushed the empty
truck away. Nearby more slaves were waiting to wheel up
more rock-filled trucks. From a command-post, black-
hooded Guards stood supervising the operation. It all
looked like a miniature railway yard, with the sweating
bodies of slaves replacing the engines.
    The Doctor tapped Jackson on the shoulder. `There you
are! What did I tell you? There's our goods entrance.'
    Jackson looked dubious. `We'll have to overpower the
Guards silently, before they can use their weapons. One
shot and the alarms will go and they'll know we're inside.
it'll he difficult...'
    `But not impossible,' whispered Leela cheerfully,
reaching for her knife. This kind of commando operation
was just what she liked. `If we can just get behind them...'
   `Well, it's just about feasible,' admitted Jackson
reluctantly. `If this plan of the Doctor's works.'
   `Well, it's not really my plan,' said the Doctor modestly.
`I got it off a chap called Ulysses. He pulled it off a while
ago... Come on !'
   He began creeping towardg a siding filled with empty
trucks.
Herrick recovered consciousness. He tried to move and
found himself clamped into a heavy metal chair. A helmet
had been fitted over his head. Leads from the helmet ran to
a nearby console, where a black-hooded figure stood
waiting.
   Two more hooded figures dressed in sombre brown
were standing over him. Their eyes glinted redly through
the eye-slits of their hoods.
   `Who the blazes are you?' whispered Herrick weakly.
   `We are Seers, servants of the Oracle. I am Ankh, and
this is my colleague, Lakh. Where are you from?'
   `Minyos.'
   A searing pain shot through Herrick's entire body.
`Liar,' said Lakh coldly. `Minyos was destroyed a hundred
thousand years ago.'
   Ankh repeated the question. `Where are you from?'
   `Minyos!'
   `Liar!' screamed Ankh. More pain. The pain stopped.
The man at the console called, `The readings show that he
speaks the truth, Master.'
   `Silence,' screamed Ankh. `We are the only survivors of
Minyos.'
   `You?' jeered Herrick. `Never!'
   `What do you seek here?' asked Lakh. `Why have you
come?'
   `We seek... the future...'
   `There is more, Master. He is holding back.'
   `More!' ordered Lakh.
   Another jolt of pain seared through Herrick's body,
making him writhe within his bonds. Ankh leaned over
him. `What else? We can make the brain boil inside your
skull. What else?'
   `All right, all right,' gasped Herrick. `No reason you
shouldn't know. We are Minyans--and we seek the
cylinders containing the Race Bank.'
   `Race Bank cylinders?' There was genuine puzzlement
in Ankh's voice. `What cylinders?'
   `The cylinders contain the genetic inheritance of the
Minyan people. They were placed on board this ship, the
P7E.'
   `You are mistaken,' said Ankh.
   `He is lying,' snarled Lakh.
   Herrick writhed under another jolt of pain.
   `There is no purpose, Master,' called Tarn. `He speaks
the truth--or what he believes is truth.'
   `The Quest,' muttered Herrick. `The Quest is the Quest!
`
   Lakh leaned over him until he could see nothing but
the sinister hood and the glowing red eyes. `This is not a
ship! Not your P7E. There is no such thing as this Race
Bank of which you speak.'
   `If you were really Minyans you would know,' said
Herrick obstinately.
   `The Guards and slaves are all of true Minyan descent.
So are we, though we have evolved far beyond them.'
   `Then who are you? What are you?'
   `We are the Seers, the servants of the Oracle. Our flesh
has been changed by the one we serve. See!'
   The two sinister figures swept off their hoods--and
Herrick gave a gasp of horror. Their heads were made of
polished metal, with two great glowing red crystals for
eyes.
   The servants of the Oracle were no longer human. The
heads they wore had been given them by their Master.
One by one the slaves pushed their trucks up to the mouth
of the Crusher. One by one the trucks deposited their rocks
and were pushed away. There was a steady crunching roar
as the Crusher devoured its food.
   The last two slaves on the line were Idmon and Idas.
They pushed a truck which seemed curiously light. A
length of plastic sheeting had been tossed over the top.
   The Doctor and Leela were crouched down inside the
truck. They heard the roar of the Crusher coming nearer
and nearer...
   `Any minute now, Leela,' whispered the Doctor.
   But at this point the Doctor's plan went a little astray.
   Idas was supposed to stop the truck before he tipped it,
giving the Doctor and Leela a chance to climb through the
hole and work their way round the Crusher and into the
ship.
   At the last moment his foot turned on a chunk of rock.
He stumbled, inadvertently shoving the truck forward.
   To his horror it tipped--shooting the Doctor and Leela
straight towards the Crusher...
                  Chapter Twelve
                    The Battle
Just as the Doctor's truck reached the feeder-hole, a second
truck appeared, pushed up by another group of slaves. As it
came level with the squad of Guards it stopped. Jackson
and Orfe leaped out, shield guns in hand.
    As Orfe dropped down from the truck, a Guard raised
his blaster. Tala shot from the side tunnel, and the Guard
fell--straight on to an alarm button. The howl of a siren
filled the air.
    More Guards appeared and opened fire on the rebels.
Jackson and Orfe fired from behind the truck. Tala and her
armed slaves joined in from the side-lines, and the Guards
were caught in a deadly cross-fire.
    The howl and whine of blasters filled the air.
    The Doctor, meanwhile, was clinging to the edge of the
truck by his finger tips, trying desperately not to slide out
and through the hole. Below him he caught a glimpse of a
pit filled with whirring, grinding, sharp tooth cogs,
pulverising the chunks of rock into powder.
    The metal of the truck was slippery with fine rock-dust,
and the Doctor felt his fingers beginning to slide. Leela
was scrambling for a hold just above him... and if she
slipped and fell on to him...
    The Doctor felt hands grasping his feet, taking
the weight from his aching fingers. He slid down carefully,
and Idas helped him to his feet.
    Leela came down after him, and the Doctor helped her
from the truck.
    He peered through the mouth of the Crusher. It was a
steeply slanted shaft, leading straight into a pit filled with
grinding machinery. There was no way through it or round
it -- not in one piece, anyway!
   Abandoning his original plan, the Doctor dodged
behind the truck. A fierce three-cornered battle was raging
all around him. Orfe and Jackson were hiding behind the
nearest trucks, exchanging fire with the Guards. Tala and
her freed slaves were shooting from the side-lines.
   `Come on, Leela!' shouted the Doctor. Ducking and
weaving, they ran across to Jackson. At the sight of the
Doctor, K9 zipped out of a side tunnel to join them.
   `Right,' said the Doctor briskly. `We haven't much time,
so everybody stay calm. K9, back to the ship, check all
systems are in order and prepare for blast of. We may be
leaving in a bit of a hurry.'
   `Affirmative,' said K9 and glided away.
   The Doctor turned to Jackson. `I'm going to try to find
some other route to the Oracle. It'll mean working my way
round the ship. Can you and the others manage to hold off
the Guards?'
   `We can try, Doctor,' said Jackson grimly. He ducked as
a maser-bolt whizzed past his head.
   `Good! Leela, you're coming with me.'
   `I'm staying to fight!'
   `You're coming with me! You too, Idas. Have you got
that sword?'
   Idas paused for a moment to clasp hands with his father.
   `Take care, my son,' murmured Idmon.
   `You too, father.'
   `Right, Jackson,' said the Doctor. `We'll be off. Can you
give us covering fire?'
   `Ready when you are, Doctor.'
   The Doctor sprinted for the side tunnel at the back of
the loading area, Leela and Idas at his heels.
   Guards opened fire as soon as they broke cover. Jackson
and the others replied with a sustained volley from their
shield guns. The Doctor and his two companions reached
the tunnel entrance and disappeared from sight.
   Inside the loading area the battle raged on. More Guards
appeared in answer to the alarm summons, but Jackson
and the others fought on undismayed, catching the blaster-
bolts of their enemies on their shield guns and using the
deadly weapons to terrible effect.
   Tala and her little army of freed slaves fought like
demons. Every time a Guard fell, another slave snatched
his weapon and joined the battle.
   Soon Jackson realised that something completely
unexpected was happening. They were winning. `Forward!'
he yelled and led a charge that drove the Guards back into
the tunnels of the ship.
   Rask dived into cover and used his communicator,
panic in his voice. `They're driving us back. There are too
many of them. They've armed the slaves--it's a full-scale
revolt. They're too strong for us, I need reinforcements...'
   Rask and his fellow Guards had been terrorising slaves
for too long. They had lost their taste for real fighting.
In the security section, Tarn, Lakh and Ankh listened in
horror to the panic-stricken voice babbling from the
speaker.
   `Hold them!' ordered Tarn. `You must hold on.'
   Ankh thrust him away from the communicator. `Rask! I
order you to stand and fight. You must protect the Oracle.'
   `Master, we cannot hold them back much longer. We
must retreat!'
   `No excuses! Stand and fight!'
   Still strapped in the interrogation chair, Herrick
laughed despite his weakness. `There's no stopping us now.
A hundred thousand years of searching... I smell victory!'
   Lakh ignored him, turning to his fellow Seer. `Let us
consider. What is more important--these cylinders, or the
safety of the Oracle?'
   `The Oracle, of course, but--'
   `Then should we not give them what they seek and let
them depart?'
   `But what they seek does not exist!'
   `The Oracle will know. Why should we destroy each
other?' He went over to Herrick. `These cylinders--tell us
what they look like. If they are indeed here, you shall have
them and take them to your comrades.'
   `You will set me free?'
   `Yes!'
   `There are two of them, made of solid gold, and stamped
with the mark of Minyos. They are the length of a man's
hand.'
   `Good, Tarn, tell Rask what we have decided. He is to
arrange a truce.'
   Tarn hurried to the communicator.
Deep inside the side-tunnels, the Doctor paused at a
junction, getting his bearings. `This way, I think.'
    Leela shook her head. `No.'
    `Why not?'
    `There are Guards moving this way.'
    `Ah!' The Doctor noticed a grille set into the wall.
`What's behind there, Idas? Does it lead inside the
Citadel?'
    `I don't know.'
    `I think it must. Let's find out, shall we?' The Doctor
produced his sonic screwdriver, and set to work on the
hatch-bolts.
    By the time the squad of Guards came thundering down
the tunnel it was empty. They were in too much of a hurry
to notice that the hatch cover was slightly ajar.
    The Doctor and his companions found themselves
inside a narrow ventilation shaft, just big enough to move
along if you knelt down. The Doctor wriggled happily into
its depths, and the others followed.
    Some time later, the Doctor paused and raised his hand.
`If my sense of direction's still working, we ought to be
nearly there!' They came to another wall vent and Leela
peered through.
    `Look, Doctor! We've arrived!'
    They looked through the grille. Two hooded figures
bowed before a screen of flickering lights.
     Lakh bowed low before the Oracle. `The intruders are
defeating us,' he said bluntly. `They will destroy us,
destroy you, unless they are given these cylinders.'
     There was a long pause. Then the husky whisper of the
Oracle said, `Shall they not be destroyed by that which
they so desperately desire?'
     `Can it be done?'
     `Cannot all things be done--by me?'
     The light-panel flashed and flickered, there was a hum
of power--and a column rose out of the main console. On
it rested two golden cylinders.
     Lakh took them, bowed low and left the control room.
     `They're giving up without a fight?' whispered Leela.
     The Doctor rubbed his chin. `Yes, it certainly seems like
it.'
     `Why?'
     `That's what's worrying me!' In the Doctor's experience
rational acceptance of defeat wasn't a characteristic of
dictators. Now that he knew what the Oracle was, it
seemed even less likely. `Let's take a look round, shall we?'
He set to work on the grille.
Crouched down behind one of the trucks, Jackson said
suddenly, `Orfe, listen. They're not firing back!'
   The fierce whistle of blaster fire had diminished. All the
shooting was coming from their own side.
   Jackson shouted, `Hold your fire, everybody!'
   After the uproar of battle, the silence was deafening.
   They heard footsteps coming towards them. Rask
appeared, his empty hands spread wide before him.
   Jackson stood up.
   `Careful,' whispered Orfe, `it could be a trick.'
   `Be ready, then.'
   Rask came nearer and halted. `I have been ordered to
speak with you.'
   `You wish to surrender?'
   `We offer a truce.'
   `On what terms?'
   `You may take what you came for and depart, leaving us
to our own ways. Agree--or your comrade will be
executed.'
   `What comrade? Herrick is dead!'
   `You think so, Captain?'
   Rask stepped aside. Herrick was behind him, flanked by
Guards. He was bruised and limping and weary, but his
face was filled with an almost unearthly joy. He held a
golden cylinder in each hand. `Captain, I've got them! The
Quest is over!'
   Herrick was sobbing with emotion. `The Quest is over,
Captain. The Quest is over!'
   Jackson walked slowly out to meet him. `At last,' he
whispered. At last...
The Doctor helped Leela and Idas through the grille. `Stay
here!'
    Clutching the sword, the Doctor began prowling about
the control room. Everything was gloomy and silent. The
ceremonial hangings, the temple lamps, the general
atmosphere of centuries of disuse gave the place the air of a
temple or a tomb.
    The Doctor crept stealthily around, studying the
disused control console and the unmoving dials. He
opened a wall locker and gave a sigh of satisfaction. Shelves
lined with spare parts. Burglar-like, the Doctor began
filling his pockets.
    When he had finished, he closed the locker and walked
up to the altar at the end of the control room. He studied
the great lamp burning over the light-screen. He bowed
and said, `Hullo, Oracle.'
    Lights flickered on the screen, feebly at first and then
more vigorously. A husky voice whispered, `What is it that
you want?'
    `The cylinders. The Race Bank of the Minyans.'
    `Have they not been given?'
    `Well--have they? That's what I'm asking!'
   The voice hissed furiously, `Who are you to dare
question my word?'
   `Who do I have to be to dare to question your word?
After all, you're only a computer, you know. Programmed
to preserve your own safety and that of the ship. You were
made to serve, not rule. But after the crash you took over,
didn't you? Set up this disgusting society of Guards and
Seers and slaves just so you could survive!'
   `Who are you?'
   `I'll give you a clue, shall I? If it wasn't for my people
you'd never have existed.'
   `What people?'
   `The ones the Minyans called the gods.'
   `Gods!' The husky voice was scornful. `There are no
gods but me! Have I not created myself? Do I not rule? Am
I not all-powerful?'
   `Well, yes and no... In here, you are. But nowhere else.
You're just another machine with megalomania, another
insane object, a self-aggrandising artefact.' The Doctor
laughed scornfully and turned away. `You're nothing--
nothing but a mass of superheated junk with delusions of
grandeur!'
   As the Doctor had hoped, the string of insults provoked
the Oracle to uncontrollable rage. `Nothing!' it roared. `Am
I not the Keeper of the Race Bank of Minyos?'
   The Doctor spun round. `Still the Keeper, are you? So
you've still got them!'
   `I am the Keeper,' roared the insane voice.
   The Doctor was studying the main console. As he'd
hoped, there was a socket in its base.
   `Keeper? You're nothing but a mechanical moneybox--
and I've got the key. Give me that sword, Leela.'
   Taking the sword from Idas, Leela ran across to the
Doctor and passed it over. He thrust it to the hilt into the
socket and began turning it like a giant key.
   The Oracle gave an agonised shout, `Destroy him!
Destroy! Destroy! Destroy!'
   Leela heard the sound of a nearby alarm and the rush of
pounding feet. `Listen, Doctor, the Guards are coming!'
   The Doctor ignored her. Once, twice, three times he
twisted the sword.
   `Leave it, Doctor,' shouted Leela urgently. `You must
come now, or the Guards will kill us.'
   `Just one more turn,' gasped the Doctor. `It's a bit stiff!'
   `Destroy! Destroy! Destroy!' boomed the Oracle.
                Chapter Thirteen
                  Doomsday
The Doctor gave one final twist, there was a click--and a
crystal casket bearing two golden cylinders rose from the
console. The Doctor opened it, snatched them up and
thrust them into his pockets. `No hard feelings, old chap,'
he said, and ran for the grille. Leela and Idas pulled him
through, and they disappeared into the shaft.
   They wriggled through the narrow opening like rats
with a cat after them, and emerged at last into the tunnel.
`Which way?' gasped Leela.
   They could hear the shouts of Guards from somewhere
close by.
   `We've got to get away from the ship,' said the Doctor.
`They know this area better than we do.'
   Idas said, `The tunnels, Doctor. Let's go deeper into the
tunnels. I know a place where they'll never find us. This
way!'
   Confidently, Idas led them into the maze of tunnels.
In the security section Ankh stood by the surveillance
monitors, watching as Tarn punched up shot after shot of
empty tunnels. Suddenly Tarn caught a glimpse of three
figures disappearing round a corner. `They have just
entered Seven, Master.'
   `Good. Close it down and collapse it!'
   Tarn moved to a separate control console. All the
tunnels had explosive charges set into the roof. It was
another method of controlling the Trogs--causing the
Skyfalls, the tunnel subsidences that kept down their
numbers.
   Tarn reached for a control.
Idas led them into a dead-end tunnel. Blocked by a fall of
rock, it formed a kind of cave. `This tunnel is disused--it
was blocked by a Skyfall. We should be safe here.'
   There was a rumbling crash, and the tunnel entrance
collapsed.
   Leela jumped back, looking angrily at Idas. `Safe, you
said? Doctor, we're sealed in!'
   The Doctor seemed scarcely aware of the catastrophe.
He had taken the cylinders from his pockets and was
studying them absorbedly.
   `Doctor, what's the matter with you?'
   The Doctor looked up. `If these are the Race Bank
cylinders--I was just wondering what they've given
Jackson!'
Reverently, Jackson placed the two golden cylinders in the
casket. `The Quest is over! Orfe, set course for Minyos II.
K9, how do we stand for launch?'
   K9 whirred and buzzed. `Energy absorption still not at
optimum level.'
   Tala checked the readings. `There's enough power to get
away, Captain--but only just.'
   `I say we go now,' said Herrick explosively. `We've got
what we came for.'
   `Negative,' said K9 firmly. `Personnel incomplete.
Doctor and the Mistress not on board.'
   Jackson hesitated. The urge to get the Race Bank to
Minyos was almost overpowering. But he owed the Doctor
a good deal. `All right, K9, go and find them. Tell them
we've got the cylinders and we're leaving now!'
   `Affirmative!'
The Doctor sat studying the cylinders. Leela felt like
shaking him. `Don't you understand, Doctor? We're
trapped! We could be here forever!'
   `What? No, no. They'll come and dig us out.'
   `Why should they bother?'
   `Because we've got something they want,' said the
Doctor simply. He hefted the cylinders. `The Oracle wants
these back--remember?'
Tarn was receiving final orders from Lakh. `At all costs the
cylinders must be recovered and replaced. The Oracle
commands it. Order a party of slaves to Seven to clear the
Skyfall.'
   `What of the intruders?'
   `When the cylinders are recovered, feed their bodies
into the Crusher.'
   `It shall be done, Master!'
In the control room of the Minyan patrol vessel,
everything was ready. Tala, Orfe, and Herrick were already
at their posts. Jackson paced to and fro, his eyes on the
corridor to the airlock.
   `Secondary checks complete,' reported Tala.
   `Third and final check commencing,' said Orfe.
   Jackson stared at the gleaming cylinders and again at
the door. `Come on, Doctor. Come on!'
Leela pointed to the rockfall that had trapped them. `Look,
Doctor! Something's happening.'
   They all looked. The rock surface was stirring, smoking.
As they stepped back the rocks exploded into a kind of
tunnel--through it appeared K9.
   The Doctor chuckled. `There you are, K9! What kept
you?'
   `Gratitude unnecessary,' said K9 imperturbably. `Speed
vital. Please hurry, Master!'
Jackson made his decision. `We'll have to leave them.
Commence final countdown.'
   Orfe began counting. `Ten... nine... eight...'
   `Run up drive.'
   `Seven... six... five...'
   `Drive running,' reported Tala.
   `Four... three... two...'
   `Pressurise and prepare for blast off.'
   `One...'
   The Doctor shot through the control room door, Leela
and Idas close behind him. `Stop! Jackson, here are your
Race Banks. The real ones!' He held up the cylinders.
   Jackson stared at them, then at the two identical
cylinders in the casket. `Then what are those?'
   The Doctor gave him the real cylinders and took the
others from the casket. `That's what I intend to find out.
K9, see what you can make of these.' He knelt and held
them under the little automaton's nose.
   It didn't take K9's scanners long to find the answer.
   `Analysis indicates fission grenades, Master.'
   The Doctor tried to unscrew one of the cylinders.
   `Negative! Do not proceed! Impossible to defuse.
Grenades programmed to self-detonate shortly. Explosive
content in excess of two thousand megatons. Attempt to
defuse will detonate immediately.'
   `How long have we got--if I leave them alone?'
   `Accurate estimate impossible. Timing mechanism
shielded.'
   Almost automatically Jackson put the genuine cylinders
in their casket. `What are we going to do, Doctor?'
   The Doctor looked at the two camouflaged atom-bombs
in his hands. `I think I'd better get rid of these, don't you?'
he said mildly.
   `Affirmative,' said K9.
   But the Doctor had already left the control room.
   `Wait, Doctor,' shouted Leela, and ran after him. Idas
hesitated a moment and then followed.
   They came out of the ship in time to see the tail of the
Doctor's scarf disappearing round the tunnel bend. `Come
on,' said Leela. `He may need us. After him!'
`Why have they not been found?' whispered the Oracle
angrily.
   Ankh bowed low. `When the slaves cleared the Skyfall
the intruders had already gone.'
   `Shall they not be found?' demanded the Oracle almost
petulantly. `Is that not my purpose?'
   It had ruled for so long that it was unable to understand
that its will could be crossed, let alone that it could fail.
   `They shall be found,' promised Ankh. `It shall be done
as you command. Your servant Rask searches for them
now...'
The Doctor shot round a bend and ran straight into Rask
and his squad who were herding along a mob of slaves. For
a moment they all stared at each other in mutual surprise.
   The Doctor said politely, `Excuse me, could you direct
me to the Oracle? I'm a stranger here.'
   `I'll take those cylinders, Doctor,' snarled Rask.
   `I wouldn't if I were you. They won't do you any--'
   `Give them here! ` Rask snatched the cylinders from the
Doctor's hands. `Guards, take care of him. Make sure you
finish him off--throw him into the Crusher. I shall take
the cylinders back to the Citadel.' Rask was eager to grab
the credit of success.
   `You're making a terrible mistake,' said the Doctor.
`Those aren't what you want at all!'
   Rask laughed. `You can do better than that, Doctor.' He
hurried away.
   `Ah well,' said the Doctor thoughtfully. He looked at the
Guards. `Killing me won't solve anything, you know.
Those cylinders were bombs.'
   The Guards levelled their blasters.
   There was a sudden crackle of blaster fire from behind
him and the Doctor promptly threw himself to the ground.
When he looked up the Guards were fleeing or dead, and
Leela was running towards him. `Doctor, are you all right?'
   He straightened up. `Yes, I think so. Let's get out of
here, we've not got much time... Idas, bring your people.'
   Idas turned to the cowering slaves. `Listen to me, all of
you. The prophecy has been fulfilled, our gods have come
to save us. We can escape to the stars. Skyfall in Tunnel
Seven. Bring your families, tell the others. Our gods await
us!'
Lakh hurried up to the Oracle with the cylinders. `They
have been found, great one.'
   `Replace them, quickly. They must never leave my
keeping again.'
   Ankh replaced the cylinders in the casket, and it sank
slowly out of sight.
There was an astonishing scene outside the airlock of the
Minyan patrol vessel. A long line of slaves, men, women,
old people, children, was filing through the airlock, bustled
along by the Doctor, who was acting as a kind of
commissionaire, helped by Leela and Idas. `Come along
now, come along,' shouted the Doctor cheerfully. `Plenty of
room for everyone. Everything's going to be all right. Move
along now!'
   A furious Jackson pushed his way out through the
airlock. `What's going on here, Doctor? Get these people
off my ship. We can't carry all this weight, we're too low on
fuel.'
   `You'll have to carry them,' said the Doctor grimly.
`This planet's about to explode.'
   `Get them off,' insisted Jackson. `I'm sorry, Doctor, but I
must safeguard the Race Banks--for the future of the
Minyan people.'
   The Doctor gripped his arm. `Listen, Jackson, these are
your people. They're descendants of those who came on the
P7E.'
   `We can't take the weight,' said Jackson desperately.
   `You've got to. Your only hope is to go, and go now. Get
back to the command deck.'
   Jackson hesitated, then turned and forced his way
through the crowd.
   The Doctor went on chivvying the slaves. `Come on
now, everyone inside. When you get in, just sit down and
stay calm!'
   They got them all in at last and a furious Herrick
slammed and locked the airlock. `Outer section sealed.'
   The Doctor looked round the command deck. There
were slaves everywhere, against the walls, across the floor,
leaning against the consoles. Most of them were out of
sight, stowed away in the holds and the storage areas, but
there were still enough left over to overflow into the
control room.
   Jackson picked his way through the litter of prone
bodies to his command chair. `Run up on drive.'
   `Drive running!'
   `Prepare to blast off!'
   Orfe began counting. `Ten... nine... eight... seven, six,
five, four, three, two, one--blast off!'
   Slowly, painfully slowly, the Minyan space ship broke
free of the soft planetary surface and launched itself
towards the stars. Ankh watched it go on a surface monitor,
and looked triumphantly at Lakh. `They have cleared the
surface. Soon they will be blown to dust!'
   The frantic clamour of an alarm bell sent him running
to the main control room.
   The Oracle's lights were flashing in a frenzy of
agitation. `I have analysed the cylinders. These are the
bombs. Get rid of them or we shall all be destroyed.'
   Lakh took the cylinders. `How--where?' he asked
helplessly. `There is no time.'
   `Defuse them--now!'
The space ship rose, rose... hovered for a moment, and
began to fall back towards the grey surface of the planet.
The combination of extra weight and low energy-levels
made it impossible for the ion-drive to pull the ship free...
   `More power,' shouted Jackson. `We're falling back!'
   TaIa looked up despairingly. `There is no more.'
   The Doctor and Leela entered from the hold, where
they had been trying to reassure the panic-stricken slaves.
`Everything all right, Jackson?' asked the Doctor
cheerfully.
   `No, it isn't! We don't have enough power to reach
escape velocity. You know why, don't you, Doctor? It's the
extra weight!'
   `Oh, come on, Jackson, don't despair. Be brave! Why
don't you sit down?'
   Despairingly Jackson sank into his command chair. On
the monitor the planet surface rushed ever closer.
Ankh clawed desperately at the gold sphere. `It is not
possible to defuse this.'
   `Why? Why?'
   `Because you made it so!'
   There was a silence. The Oracle whispered wearily, `I
have failed in my duty. I deserve destruction.'
   The cylinder in Ankh's hand began to glow. The glow
grew brighter, brighter, till it consumed the control room,
the P7E and eventually the planet itself.
   The planet exploded into a billion fragments of rocky
debris.
The Doctor watched the explosion on the ship's monitor
screen. `There she goes. No planetary gravity to hold you
now, Jackson--no planet! Prepare to ride the blast!'
   Released from the pull of gravity, the P7E bucketed for
a moment in the shock-wave, then streaked out into deep
space.
   In the control room there was an atmosphere of
jubilation.
   `We've made it,' shouted Orfe. `We've made it!'
   `Speed?' asked Jackson.
   `Four-sevenths light.'
   `Course?'
   `One, two, zero.'
   `How long to Minyos II?'
   `Three hundred and seventy years,' said Herrick. He
grinned. `That's nothing, is it, Captain?'
   The Doctor was unloading a series of strangely shaped
objects on to the top of the console. `I picked up one or two
spare parts for you on the P7E--including a spare set of
guidance crystals.' He bent down and patted K9. `So you
won't need my friend here any more.'
   The Doctor and Leela began leaving the control room,
K9 trundling after them.
   `Aren't you coming with us to Minyos II?' asked
Jackson, astonished.
   Hurriedly the Doctor shook his head. `Sorry, no time.
I'm very busy, you know.' He paused, and smiled.
`Goodbye--Jason!'
   `Goodbye, Doctor.'
   A chorus of thanks and farewells came from the crew.
But the Doctor and his companions had gone.
   A few minutes later a strange, wheezing, groaning sound
echoed through the ship. Then it died away...
                 Chapter Fourteen
                   The Legend
Magnificent in painter's smock and floppy beret, the
Doctor was preparing to get on with his decorating. Leela
watched him resignedly. A sudden thought struck her.
`Doctor?'
   The Doctor was busily cleaning an enormous brush.
`Um?'
   `Why did you call him Jason?'
   `Who?'
   `Jackson! When you were saying goodbye, you called
him Jason.'
   The Doctor scratched his head, leaving a streak of white
paint in his hair. `I called Jackson Jason?'
   `Yes!' said Leela, exasperated. `Is Jackson Jason?'
   The Doctor put his paintbrush down, and stared into
space. `No, no, no. Jason was another captain. He was on a
long Quest, too...'
   Not surprisingly, the legends of Ancient Greece meant
nothing to Leela. `I don't understand, Doctor.'
   `Ah!' The Doctor smiled. `He was looking for the
Golden Fleece.'
   `Did he find it?'
   `Oh yes, he found it in the end. Hanging on the Tree at
the End of the World. You know, Leela, perhaps those old
legends aren't so much stories from the past as prophecies
of the future...' Pleased with this rather fanciful idea, the
Doctor glanced down. `What do you say, K9?'
   Automatons have no time for imaginative theories.
`Negative!' said K9 firmly.
   `Negative?' The Doctor was outraged at this abrupt
dismissal of his new theory. He stared at Leela. `What did
he say?'
   `He said, negative!'
  `Negative?' spluttered the Doctor. `What does he know,
eh? Can he... can he paint?'
  Flourishing his paint brush triumphantly, the Doctor
marched out of the control room.
  Leela knelt down and kissed K9 on the end of his nose.
