`Axos calling Earth, Axos calling
Earth . . .'
The creature stood before them,
beautiful golden humanoids, offering
friendshio and their priceless Axonite,
in return for ­ what ?
Only DOCTOR WHO remains
suspicious. What is the real reason for
the Axons' sudden arrivel on Earth ? And
why is the evil Master a passenger on
their spaceship ? He very soon finds
out . . .




       UK: 50p *Australia: $1.90
       Malta: 55c New Zealand: $1.70
       *Recommended Price
       Children/Fiction     ISBN 0 426 11703 4
          DOCTOR WHO
            AND THE
         CLAWS OF AXOS
Based on the BBC television serial by Bob Baker and Dave
  Martin by arrangement with the British Broadcasting
                      Corporation


             TERRANCE DICKS




                     published by
               The Paperback Division of
                W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd
A Target Book
Published in 1977
by the Paperback Division of W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd.
A Howard & Wyndham Company
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

Novelisation copyright © Terrance Dicks 1977
Original script copyright © Bob Baker and Dave Martin
1971
`Dr Who' series copyright © British Broadcasting
Corporation 1971, 1977

Printed in Great Britain by
Cox & Wyman Ltd, Reading

ISBN 0426 11703 4

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it
is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
               CONTENTS
1 Invader from Space
2 The Landing
3 The Voice of Axos
4 Enter the Master
5 The Doctor Makes a Plan
6 Escape from Axos
7 The Axons Attack
8 The Power Robbers
9 The Sacrifice
10 Brainstorm
11 The Feast of Axos
12 Trapped in Time
                        1
               Invader from Space
It moved through the silent blackness of deep space like a
giant jellyfish through the depths of the sea. Its shape was
constantly changing, pulsating with energy and life, and a
myriad of colours flickered over its glistening surface.
Unerringly it sped towards its chosen target, the planet
known as Earth. Soon the instruments of the humans
would detect its approach. It knew this, and was
undisturbed. Detection was the first stage in its plan...
The tracking station dozed peacefully in the early morning
silence. The huge radar aerials revolved in their constant
searching, silhouetted against the blue of the sky. In an
instrument-packed room, deep inside the building, the
results of that search showed up as a blip of light, tracing
its curving course across a radar display screen. A man was
studying the blip, muttering to himself as he checked the
instruments all round him. `About one million miles...
mass variable...' He looked again at the dials, shaking his
head. `Variable? What's the book say, Harry?'
    Beside him, his assistant was immersed in a pile of star
charts and periodicity tables. `Nothing here.'
    `You sure? There's got to be!'
    Harry was bored, irritable, and in no mood for mysteries
at the end of a long and tiring shift. `Look, there's nothing
here. No comets, nothing!'
    Pleased, his superior leaned back in his swivel chair.
`Then it looks as if we've discovered a new one! Run
another course check.'
    While Harry busied himself with the instruments, the
senior technician watched the steady progress of the blip.
Ransome's Comet, he was thinking happily. Though
probably the Director would pinch all the credit, even if he
was still home in bed. Suddenly Ransome sat up. The blip
on the screen had changed direction. `You get that?'
   Harry nodded. `Picked it up on the instruments. That
thing's just altered course.'
   `But it can't have...'
   With gloomy satisfaction Harry studied a computer
print-out. `You can say goodbye to your comet, mate.
Whatever that thing is, it's now on a collision course for
Earth!'
   Harry reached for a phone, but Ransome put out a hand
to stop him. `What are you doing?'
   `Just in case you've forgotten, there's a whole batch of
people we're supposed to tell about "Unidentified Flying
Objects".' Harry pointed to a list of names and telephone
numbers on a nearby notice board. `The Director, the
Ministry of Security... and something called UNIT--the
United Nations Intelligence Task-force.'
   Ransome looked at the radar screen a moment longer,
saying goodbye to his dream of scientific immortality.
Then he sighed and picked up the telephone. `Get me the
Director, please. Red Alert. Yes I know he's still home in
bed. Wake him up. Tell him there's an Unidentified
Flying Object heading straight for Earth!'
In the military and scientific complex that formed UNIT
Headquarters, Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart's day was
getting off to a very bad start. The cause of his present
troubles was not alien monsters but Earth-bound
bureaucrats. Whitehall's latest brainchild was the newly-
created Ministry of Security, an organisation designed to
gather all Britain's various intelligence organisations under
one central umbrella. The Brigadier had refused to be
gathered, taking the position that UNIT was not a national
but an international organisation, and as such answerable
only to UNIT H.Q. in Geneva. The war of letters, memos
and reports had continued for some time now, with the
Brigadier more than holding his own. But now the
Whitehall enemy had wearied of the paper bombardment
and sent in their shock troops--in the stocky and
unattractive shape of Horatio Chinn.
   Like many small men in high positions, Chinn liked to
think of himself as Napoleonic. He saw himself as a hard-
driving human dynamo, cutting through the restraints of
red tape. He was a vain and rather stupid man, but he was
also ruthlessly ambitious and tirelessly energetic. Chinn
eventually overcame most of his opponents by wearing
them down.
   He had even worn down the Minister in charge of his
own Department, who couldn't stand the man but couldn't
think how to get rid of him. Wily old politician that he
was, the Minister had been struck by a sudden brainwave.
He had two main problems at the moment--Chinn and the
Brigadier. Why not turn them loose on each other?
Whichever proved the winner, the Minister would have
one less problem to worry about.
   The result of this brilliant strategy had been Chinn's
appointment as a one-man Committee of Enquiry. It was
now Chinn's second day with UNIT, and while the
Minister back in Whitehall basked in unaccustomed peace,
the Brigadier was already brooding on emergency court-
martials and summary executions. If only there was a war
on, he thought wistfully, he could lock the fellow up, or
even shoot him. Deciding that Chinn was definitely one of
the horrors of peace, the Brigadier looked with disfavour at
his unwanted guest. Chinn stood by an open filing cabinet,
leafing through the files of UNIT personnel. He looked the
picture of the perfect bureaucrat. Expensive pin-stripe suit,
pink face, grey hair, heavy black horn-rimmed spectacles.
Bowler hat, umbrella and briefcase were at the ready on a
nearby chair.
   Chinn put Josephine Grant's file back into the cabinet,
making a mental note that the girl was clearly too young
and too inexperienced for security work. A nice little black
mark to go into his report on the Brigadier. He lifted out
another file, read the name on the cover and opened it.
Then he looked up at the Brigadier, his face outraged. `Is
this some kind of joke?'
   The blindfold over his eyes, the last cigarette, thought
the Brigadier dreamily. Or maybe a last memo would be
better for a civil servant... Aware that Chinn was speaking,
the Brigadier dismissed his imaginary firing-squad. `I'm
sorry, Mr Chinn. You were saying?'
   `I asked if this was some kind of joke. On the front of
this file there are just two words "The Doctor". And
inside...' Chinn flapped the file angrily. `Nothing!'
   A little guiltily, the Brigadier recollected that he'd
intended to create a full set of documents for the Doctor
when he'd joined UNIT at the time of the first Auton
Invasion. Hence the file. But with one crisis following
another the matter had been over-looked. Although the
Doctor was now known to a select circle as UNIT's
Scientific Adviser, he still had no official existence--at
least, not on paper.
   The Brigadier smiled blandly, playing for time. `Very
astute of you to notice, Mr Chinn. The Doctor's file, is, as
you say, empty--for security reasons.'
   Chinn felt a glow of satisfaction. At last he had found an
issue on which he could join battle. Moreover, it was a case
where the Brigadier was clearly in the wrong. `May I
remind you, Brigadier,' he began pompously, `that I am
conducting an official enquiry on behalf of the Minister for
Security?'
   `And may I remind you, Mr Chinn, that UNIT does not
come under the Minister's authority?'
   Stalemate. Chinn tried again. `Surely as a matter of
elementary organisation, all security personnel must be
properly screened...'
   The Brigadier smiled. `And scrupulously filed. Quite so.
But the Doctor is a special case.'
   `I insist on seeing a proper file for this Doctor--whoever
he is!'
   `I'm sorry, Mr Chinn. The Doctor is my personal
responsibility.'
   Chinn slammed the filing cabinet drawer with a bang.
`You seem to think UNIT is your own private army,
Brigadier. Not so! Emphatically not so. You are funded, in
part, by the British Government. As their representative, I
demand your full co-operation.'
   Chinn had found these sudden calculated outbursts of
rage an effective means of getting his own way.
Unfortunately the Brigadier seemed quite unintimidated.
Positively uninterested, in fact. Chinn changed his
approach. `Surely, Brigadier, you can see that better liaison
with the Government is in your interests, as well as ours?
Now, who is this Doctor? Where does he come from? Is he
a British subject?'
   Thoughtfully the Brigadier stroked his clipped
moustache. How did you explain to someone as mentally
limited as Chinn that the subject of his enquiry was not
only not British, he wasn't even human? That he had
formerly been in the habit of travelling through Space and
Time in an old blue police box called the TARDIS? That
after a complete transformation in his appearance, he was
now exiled to Earth by his mysterious superiors, the Time
Lords?
   The answer was, thought the Brigadier, you did no such
thing. Not unless you wanted to be carted off in a strait-
jacket.
   The door was flung open and a tall white-haired man
strode into the room. He was wearing what appeared to be
some form of fancy dress. Chinn got a confused impression
of velvet jacket, ruffled shirt, even some kind of cloak...
The deeply lined face was curiously youthful, the bright
blue eyes blazed with energy and intelligence. The
newcomer slipped the cloak from his shoulders and tossed
it carelessly onto a chair. `Morning, Brigadier,' he said
cheerily. Leaning casually against the filing cabinet, he
looked benignly down at Chinn. `And who might you be?'
   The Brigadier rose from behind his desk. `This is Mr
Chinn from the Ministry,' he said smoothly. `Mr Chinn--
allow me to introduce the Doctor!'
Hurriedly assembling papers in her cubby-hole of an
office, Jo Grant realised that, not for the first time, she was
going to be late for the Brigadier's morning conference.
She threw open the door, rushed out and bounced straight
off a man who was trying to come in. Jo and the papers
went flying in different directions. Calmly the stranger
picked up first Jo and then the papers. He handed them
back and waited patiently while Jo dusted herself down. He
was somewhere in his early thirties, not tall but with an air
of compact strength about him. He had closely trimmed
brown hair and a pleasantly ugly face. He wore a dark-grey
lightweight suit, and clutched a slim square briefcase.
When he spoke his voice had a soft American drawl. `You
all right now, young lady? I'm looking for a fellow called
Joe Grant.'
    `I'm fine, thanks. What can I do for you?'
    The American smiled down at her. She was a pretty
little kid, fair-haired, blue-eyed, trendily dressed. She
looked far too young to be working in Intelligence. Clearly
she hadn't understood his question. `I'm looking for Joe
Grant,' he repeated.
    Jo smiled. `You're looking at her,' she corrected. `Jo,
short for Josephine.'
    The American made a rapid mental readjustment.
    If the British wanted to employ kids in their
Intelligence set-up it was no affair of his. `Well, O.K. In
that case, we're both looking for the Brigadier, right?'
    `Right! And you're the new liaison officer from
Washington. They told me you were coming.'
    The American held out his hand. `I'm Bill Filer. Pleased
to meet you.'
    Jo returned the handshake. `Follow me. I'll take you to
our leader!'
    As they walked along the corridor she said, `I gather
Washington was worried about our not catching the
Master?'
    Filer said tactfully, `Well, something like that.'
    `And you're going to deal with him single-handed?'
    `You're thinking of Errol Flynn! `
    `Who?'
    Filer grinned. `I must be getting old!'
    As they approached the door to the Brigadier's office
they heard the sound of raised voices...
    Chinn's attempts to cross-question the Doctor had met
with little success. Disliking both his tone and manner the
Doctor had recommended Chinn to mind his own
business, and thereafter ignored him, burying himself in a
pile of scientific papers. Now thoroughly enraged, Chinn
was haranguing the Brigadier. `Since no records exist for
this man, he has no official existence. I demand that you
suspend him from his duties.'
    The Doctor looked up. `Oh yes? How can you suspend
someone who doesn't exist in the first place?'
    Unable to think of a logical answer, Chinn ignored him.
`Brigadier, you must see the scandal this could cause? This
is a top-security organisation, yet one of your own advisers
is nothing less than...' He spluttered into silence, having
no real idea of what the Doctor might really be...
    The Doctor finished his sentence for him. `An alien? Oh
yes, I'm an alien, more alien than you could possibly
imagine.' Suddenly the Doctor became very angry.
Throwing down his papers he jumped to his feet, towering
menacingly over Chinn. `Suspend me if you like, Mr
Chinn. Do you think I'd mind leaving this organisation?
I'd happily leave the entire planet--if only to get away
from people like you with your petty localised obsessions...'
    Terrified, Chinn struggled to regain his self-possession.
`I have a duty to my country...'
    `To your country?' thundered the Doctor. `What about
your duty to the world? To the galaxy, if it comes to that...'
    As the Doctor and Chinn went on shouting at each
other, the door opened and Jo Grant popped her head
inside the room.
   `Sorry to interrupt, but Mr Filer's arrived from
Washington. Has the conference started yet?'
   The Brigadier bellowed, `Does it sound like it, Miss
Grant? Bring Mr Filer in by all means, the more the
merrier.'
   Rather nervously, Bill Filer edged into the room,
wondering how he'd ever got the impression that the
British were calm and reserved.
   His arrival cooled everyone down, and hurried
introductions were performed. In the awkward silence that
followed Jo said, `I thought we were here to discuss the
Master?'
   Chinn was immediately alert. `Master? Who's the
Master?'
   The Brigadier sighed. Explaining the Master was almost
as difficult as explaining the Doctor. A renegade member
of the Doctor's own Time Lord race, the Master had
followed the Doctor to Earth on a mission of vengeance,
helping the invading Nestenes on their second attempt to
conquer Earth. After the invasion had been defeated the
Master had vanished. Some time later he had reappeared in
the guise of a prominent criminologist, making a second
attempt to destroy the Doctor and conquer the Earth.
When this too was defeated, the Master had vanished yet
again. But by now his name, if little else about him, was on
the files of several world intelligence agencies. The
Americans, alarmed by vague rumours of some super-
criminal on the loose, had sent Bill Filer on a fact-finding
mission. The Brigadier hadn't really been looking forward
to Filer's arrival. There was little enough to tell about the
Master, and what there was the Americans probably
wouldn't believe.
   Filer was unlocking his briefcase. `I have a file of several
top criminals and enemy intelligence operatives in
America,' he announced solemnly. `Our people thought
maybe one of them could be this Master guy.'
   The Doctor, his anger apparently forgotten, was gazing
abstractedly out of the window at the woods and lawns that
surrounded UNIT H.Q. He spoke without turning round.
`There's absolutely no point in discussing the Master. He's
probably left Earth by now.'
   Filer gave the Doctor's back a baffled look, then turned
to the Brigadier. `If we could just check, sir?'
   The Brigadier nodded. `By all means, Mr Filer.' He
glanced at the silent figure by the window. `After all,
Doctor, we can't be certain he's, er, moved on. We've got to
go on looking.'
   Chinn was jumping up and down with impatience.
Everyone seemed to be ignoring him. `Will someone
kindly tell me--who is the Master?'
   Filer hesitated. `I'm afraid that's classified,' he said
politely. `If you don't know already, then you obviously
don't have clearance.'
   `I assure you, young man, I have been guaranteed full
access.'
   `Not by us, sir,' interrupted Filer firmly. `I'm afraid
you're a security risk!'
   The Doctor swung round, smiling. `Well, well, well!
How does it feel, Mr Chinn?'
   Perhaps fortunately, there was yet another interruption
before Chinn could reply. The door burst open and a fair-
haired young army officer rushed into the room. He
skidded to a halt, and gave the Brigadier a hurried salute.
`Sorry to interrupt, sir.'
   `All right, Captain Yates, what is it?'
   Mike Yates was breathless with excitement.
`Unidentified Flying Object, sir. Fully confirmed sighting,
coming in fast. They think it's going to attack!'
                        2
                   The Landing
`UFO bearing two zero nine... five hundred miles and
closing... velocity twenty m.p.s., decreasing... mass
variable...'
   `Sightings confirmed... Houston, held and tracking...
Hawaii held and tracking...' There was an atmosphere of
tense excitement in the UNIT operations room, and the
babble of the technicians' voices filled the air. The long
room was filled with ultra-modern communications
equipment. In one corner a computer terminal chattered
busily as it reeled out yards of print-out. Centre of
everyone's attention was the big radar screen which
showed the mysterious blip moving steadily closer to
Earth...
   Captain Yates turned to the burly figure of Sergeant
Benton, who was supervising the scene. `What's the picture
now, sergeant?'
   `Negative on asteroid, sir. They're running a missile
check.'
   Chinn pushed his way to the front of the group.
`Missile? What's all this about a missile?'
   The Brigadier gave him an impatient glance. `An
Unidentified Flying Object appears to be heading for
Earth. Shouldn't you be in touch with your Ministry, Mr
Chinn?'
   Chinn nodded emphatically. `A telephone at once, if you
please, Brigadier.'
   Captain Yates was about to hand Chinn the nearest free
telephone receiver when the Brigadier shook his head
meaningfully.
   `Show Mr Chinn the direct line, Captain Yates--the one
over there!'
   Suppressing a smile, Captain Yates said, `This way
please, Mr Chinn.' He led Chinn to a cubicle in the far
corner of the room. The cubicle actually held a perfectly
ordinary telephone--but it was far enough away to keep
Chinn out of the Brigadier's hair.
    The Brigadier looked at the blip on the screen. `Well,
Doctor--what is it?'
    The Doctor shook his head, `I haven't the slightest idea,
old chap.'
    A radar technician snapped. `Course changing now, sir.
Bearing two zero seven.'
    The Doctor was studying a computer print-out.
`Variable mass, eh? Most interesting!'
    The technician's voice became more urgent. `Orbital
flight path... UFO entering Earth's atmosphere now!'
There was a brief flare-up on the radar screen, then the
blip continued its steady course.
    Jo tugged the Doctor's sleeve. `Is it going to land?'
    The Doctor moved across to a large wall-map of the
British Isles. `Oh yes. Somewhere on the south-east coast I
should imagine.'
    The technician said, `UFO over South Atlantic, sir.'
    Chinn pushed his way to the front of the screen,
glowing with self-satisfaction. `The Minister has appointed
me co-ordinator of this operation. He wants your
communications facilities linked to strike command
immediately. I have full authority.' Chinn was under no
illusions as to the reasons for his sudden promotion. The
Minister had decided that this was an extremely tricky
situation, and had shuffled off responsibility as soon as
possible. But Chinn didn't mind responsibility. He had the
power now--and he was going to use it.
    The Brigadier looked thoughtfully at Chinn, realising
he had underestimated the man. Now Chinn had gone over
his head--and the crisis was too close to wrangle about
chains of command. He nodded to Captain Yates who said
quietly, `All taken care of, sir. We're already linked-up to
the missile base.'
   The Doctor rejoined the group. `May we ask what you
intend to do--Co-ordinator?'
   `I have been informed that several attempts have been
made to communicate with this object. It does not respond.
My orders are that unless it alters course, it is to be totally
destroyed.'
   `The usual policy, I suppose,' snapped the Doctor.
`Shoot first, ask questions later!'
   For once the Brigadier was on Chinn's side. `There's not
much alternative, Doctor. In the absence of other evidence,
we must presume that the object is hostile.'
   Chinn was talking into the red telephone. `Station
Commander? I want you ready to destroy this thing the
moment I give the word. Stand by.'
   The technician's voice came again. `Target area
confirmed. England. South-east coast.' Everyone glanced at
the Doctor, who looked aggravatingly smug but said
nothing.
   The technician's voice broke the tense silence.
   `UFO course steady, velocity decreasing, decreasing,
decreasing...' The blip on the screen slowed until it seemed
almost motionless.
   Chinn shouted down the phone. `Missile strike now,
Commander. Now!'
   Seconds later a cluster of tiny dots appeared on the
bottom of the radar screen, moving steadily towards the
larger blip in the centre. Chinn rubbed his hands. `Perfect!
A sitting target!'
   The Doctor rubbed his chin. `Hardly seems sporting,
does it?'
   Chinn was just about to make an angry retort--when
the blip in the centre of the screen suddenly disappeared.
   `Contact lost. Contact lost!' There was unbelieving panic
in the technician's voice. `The thing's--gone!'
   `Destroyed!' said Chinn in satisfied tones.
   Frantically the technician shook his head. `You don't
understand, sir. The missiles haven't even reached it yet.
Look!' On the screen the cluster of missiles streaked
steadily on into empty space.
    The Doctor tapped Chinn on the shoulder. `Don't you
think you'd better abort? What goes up must come down,
you know!'
    Chinn stared dazedly at him.
    The Doctor said sharply, `The missiles, man. For
heaven's sake, abort!'
    Chinn stumbled to the phone. `Station commander.
Abort mission. I said abort!'
    The cluster of dots vanished from the screen, as the
missiles exploded harmlessly in space.
    The Brigadier looked almost indignantly at the Doctor.
`It can't just have vanished, Doctor. Where's it gone?'
    The Doctor was back at the wall map. `It hasn't gone
anywhere--it's arrived. If my calculations are correct, we
shall find it just about... here!'
    The Doctor's long finger touched a precise spot on the
map. The Brigadier stared incredulously at him. Then he
roared. `Captain Yates! Sergeant Benton! Red Alert! I want
a full task force on the move right away!'
    Yates and Benton sprinted from the room.
Old Josh rode his ancient rusty bicycle down the rutted
lane, muttering and grumbling to himself as he pedalled
along. Old Josh always had something to grumble about.
There had been a lot of changes in recent years, and he
didn't much care for any of them. The biggest and worst
change of all had been the building of some enormous
new-fangled scientific complex, slap in the middle of the
marshes, and right between Josh's tumbledown cottage and
the nearest pub. Since the complex was completely fenced
off, Josh had to ride an extra two miles to get to his beer.
He cursed the scientists and their buildings every thirsty
inch of the way.
   Josh was rounding the curve by Ducket's Pond when it
happened. A sudden bright light, an ear-shattering whistle,
a massive shape cutting off the sun. Josh gave a shout of
rage and fear, and rode his bike straight into the pond.
   Luckily for Josh, the water, although murky, was fairly
shallow. He surfaced in a shower of mud and duckweed.
Disentangling himself from his bike, he staggered out of
the pond, dragging the old machine after him. Once on the
bank he shook himself like a dog after a swim and looked
round for the cause of his accident. He felt pretty sure it
was all the fault of `them scientists', and enticing thoughts
of financial compensation began to form in his mind.
Blowing a man clear off his bike! That ought to be worth a
few quid.
   Shading his eyes with his hand, Old Josh peered round.
Just behind a clump of trees, a column of dust and smoke
was drifting skywards. Guessing that this was the scene of
the mysterious accident, Josh started wheeling his bike
across country. As he came round the edge of the trees he
stopped in astonishment. Just before him, in the centre of a
patch of open marshland, was an irregular humped shape,
as if a low hill had appeared from nowhere. At first Josh
thought some giant meteorite had fallen from the skies and
buried itself in the ground. But as he came closer to the
mound, he saw that it wasn't made of stone. It was hard to
see what it was made of--the lumpy mottled surface
seemed to reflect the light in several colours at once, and
the thing looked grown rather than made. Josh touched it
cautiously then snatched back his hand. Dratted thing was
hot!
   Cautiously Josh began walking round his discovery. It
took him several minutes to make the full circuit, and he
ended up where he'd started, none the wiser. There were
no openings, no markings, just the same mottled, lumpy
surface all the way round.
   Water forming a puddle around his feet, Josh gazed
thoughtfully at the mysterious object. Whatever it was, it
was news. Josh had visions of free-spending journalists
crowding into his favourite pub, buying pints all round--
not to mention a handful of fivers for the lucky
eyewitness...
   Josh was so intent on turning his experience to profit it
didn't occur to him the object might have plans of its own.
He didn't notice the thick, vine-like tentacle as it emerged
from the base of the mound and crawled slowly towards
him. Suddenly, the tentacle reared up, wrapped itself
round his body and dragged him towards the mound... He
struggled uselessly for a moment, then went limp, fainting
from sheer terror. An opening appeared in the mound, like
a gaping mouth, and Josh disappeared inside. The gap
closed behind him, and all was quiet.
   When he came to, minutes later, he was in the heart of a
nightmare. A network of tentacles held him flat on his
back, powerless to move. A giant eye on a flexible stalk
peered down at him. Multi-coloured lights played over his
face, and an eerie throbbing filled the air. A cold, clear,
sibilant voice filled the space all around him. `Analysis
pattern reveals... locomotor facility normal... sensory
receptors acute... intelligence quotient atypically low.'
There was a moment's pause, then the Voice of Axos
delivered its final judgement. `This specimen is valueless.
Absorb, process and eject.'
   The tentacles tightened their grip and Josh went rigid as
all life and energy were instantly drawn out of him. He
opened his mouth to scream but no sound emerged. His
face dried and cracked like a river bed in times of drought.
A gap opened beneath him and Axos absorbed him once
more...
Chinn jabbed a finger at the map. By now he had recovered
from his shock, and his Napoleonic streak was emerging
once more. `We can be certain that this thing is hostile.
According to your own calculations, Doctor, it's landed
right beside the national power complex. Britain's entire
power supply is menaced. Such a choice of landing site
cannot be accidental.'
   The Brigadier felt forced to admit that Chinn seemed to
have a point. The Nuton Power Complex was the vital first
step in Britain's use of atomic power for domestic and
industrial supply. From one enormous nuclear reactor,
power was chanelled to outlets all over the country. The
fact that of all possible sites, the thing had plonked itself
down beside the Nuton Reactor seemed suspicious in the
extreme.
   Sergeant Benton clattered back into the room looking
tough and efficient in his combat uniform. `Task Force
ready to move, sir. The men are waiting in the assembly
area.'
   `We'll be right with you. Doctor, shall we go?'
   The Doctor nodded and followed the Brigadier to the
door. Jo and Filer started to go with them, but Chinn
suddenly raised his hand.
   `One moment, Mr Filer. This is a purely internal
matter, and your presence is unnecessary. I suggest you
report back to your own people.'
   Filer stood quite still. Encouraged by his quietness,
Chinn went on, `I must warn you that unless you leave
immediately. I shall have you placed under arrest.'
   The Brigadier was outraged at this treatment of an ally.
`Now look here, Chinn,' he began.
   Filer interrupted. `It's O.K., Brigadier,' he said
soothingly. `I wouldn't want to cause any friction.' He took
a long hard look at the wall-map, then moved towards the
door. `Goodbye, Mr Chinn. Take care!' He slipped quietly
from the room.
   Once he was out of the door, Bill Filer made for the car-
park at a run. He knew exactly what the Brigadier's next
move would be--he'd clear the entire area around the UFO
landing site and seal it off with a cordon of troops. Once
that cordon was in place it would be a major operation to
get past it, especially with that guy Chinn gumming up the
works. But if a man could get to the site before the cordon,
he'd be right on the spot from the beginning. Filer
reckoned that a UFO landing in England was something
that concerned America too. When he reported back to
Washington it was going to be with every possible scrap of
information.
    As he jumped into his car Filer knew he had only a few
minutes lead. Already the UNIT lorries were almost ready
to move off, engines running as the last few armed men
leaped on board. Filer swung his dark-green Ford ahead of
the convoy, out of the car-park and roared down the road
towards the coast.
    He pushed the powerful car to its limits, thankful it was
winter rather than summer and traffic on the coastal road
was light. He'd expected to find curious crowds in the
Nuton area, but as he drove through the marshlands
everything seemed quiet and deserted. Soon the Nuton
buildings came in sight, gleaming like some science fiction
city across the marshes, encircled by their high perimeter
fence. Filer summoned up a mental picture of the UNIT
map. If the Doctor's calculations were correct, the UFO
had landed somewhere to the north-west of the main
complex.
    Reducing speed to a crawl, Filer drove slowly around
the complex, eyes searching the flat, desolate country about
him. There was nothing to see, just deserted marshland
with a few clumps of trees. Then suddenly he saw it, an
irregularly shaped mound close by a clump of trees. It
didn't look much like a spaceship--but if the UFO had
buried itself in the soft ground...
    Filer swung his car off the road, jolted it across the
marshes and parked in the middle of the clump of trees.
Jumping out, he began walking cautiously towards the
mound.
    Just beside it, he stumbled over a rusty old bike lying on
its side. Filer scratched his head. Maybe the thing had been
here all along... Or maybe he wasn't the first to examine
the strange mound. And in that case, what had happened
to the guy with the bike?
    Like Old Josh before him, Filer made a cautious
examination of the mound. He touched the strange
mottled surface, cooling rapidly now, but still warm to the
touch. Filer thought he could detect a faint throbbing, as if
the thing were alive.
   Again like Josh, Filer walked around the mound,
returning eventually to his starting point. He stood looking
at the mound, scratching his head. He had a swift mental
picture of the way they'd react in Washington if he came
back with a report that the British had been invaded by a
giant pumpkin from outer space. The roar of vehicles
interrupted his thoughts--UNIT was right on his tail.
Instinctively he flung himself to the ground and wriggled
into cover of the trees.
   Prone behind a tree-trunk, Filer watched the arrival of
the UNIT convoy. No sooner had the lorries stopped
moving than armed troops jumped down and began
spreading out in a cordon, encircling the entire area. Filer
saw Yates and Sergeant Benton directing the men into
their positions.
   Two more vehicles drove up and parked near the
convoy. The first was ultra-modern, a huge gleaming
vehicle about the size and shape of an outsize furniture
van, with a forest of aerials projecting from its roof. Some
kind of Mobile H.Q., guessed Filer. Probably a portable
laboratory packed with electronic scanning devices. By
contrast, the second vehicle was small and very old
fashioned. It was a vintage Edwardian roadster, and from it
descended the Doctor and Jo Grant. They surveyed the
busy scene around them for a moment, then made for the
mobile H.Q.
   Last vehicle to arrive was a huge, gleaming staff car.
The doors opened and Chinn, the Brigadier, a man in a
dark suit and another in sports jacket and flannels jumped
out, all arguing furiously. Chinn ushered them towards the
Mobile H.Q. and they too disappeared inside.
   Filer lay flattened in his hiding place, wondering what
to do next. There seemed little chance of learning very
much more where he was now. And he'd feel distinctly
foolish if one of the UNIT soldiers found him hiding
behind a tree. But if he went to the Mobile H.Q. Chinn
would have him arrested...
   Before Filer could make up his mind, the decision was
taken for him. The tentacle had been creeping nearer for
some time. In a final lunge it wrapped itself round Filer's
body and dragged him towards the mound...
   Seconds later, Filer, like Josh before him, lay pinioned
and helpless in the heart of Axos. The single eye on its
long stalk hovered horribly above him, and multi-coloured
lights played over his face. But this time the cold
whispering voice reached a different conclusion. `Subject
intelligent, aggressive, possibly dangerous. Hold for
further analysis and investigation.'
   There was a crackle of energy and Filer felt
consciousness slipping away...
                       3
                The Voice of Axos
Inside the Mobile H.Q., technicians were busily scanning
the mysterious mound nearby. The Doctor, clipboard in
hand, was studying instrument-readings, jotting down
notes with a frown of concentration on his face. He didn't
look up when the Brigadier and his party bustled in.
Formal as ever, the Brigadier made introductions. `Doctor,
this is Sir George Hardiman, Administrative Head of the
Nuton Power Complex. This is Doctor Winser, Head of
Research.' The Doctor gave a brief nod, and went on
working. The Brigadier coughed. `The Doctor is our
Scientific Adviser.' Hardiman and Winser looked politely
baffled. They were two very different types, thought Jo.
The first, immaculate in his dark suit, was very much the
administrator, a man at home in board rooms and
Government offices. Winser was more casually dressed.
Tall and thin, he looked surprisingly young for his
eminent position. He had a keen, beaky-nosed face, and
untidy fair hair.
   As if continuing a previous argument, Winser spoke
urgently to the Brigadier. `You must see that any form of
military attack so close to the labs could be extremely
dangerous.'
   Hardiman joined in to support his colleague. `And as
well as the research laboratories, most of Britain's nuclear
energy resources are concentrated less than half a mile
from this spot! `
   The Brigadier snapped, `At the moment we've no idea
what we're up against. We are merely taking necessary
precautions. I've been in touch with the Regular Army--
they'll be bringing up some artillery support.'
   `Artillery!' The Doctor's voice was scornful. `Your
missiles weren't much use, were they? What chance have
your bazookas?' Suddenly he changed the subject. `Winser,
did you say? I read a copy of your paper, "Relativity
Phenomena in Particle Acceleration". Most interesting.'
The gratified smile on Winser's face slipped as the Doctor
added kindly, `Basic, mind you--but interesting. We must
have a good long chat later on.' The Doctor waved a hand
at the rows of dials. `Now then, gentlemen... As far as I can
establish with these rather primitive instruments, the
device or whatever has buried itself deep beneath the
ground. That mound you saw represents the tip of the
iceberg, so to speak. For the moment there's not much we
can do about it.'
   Jo saw Hardiman look meaningfully at Winser. Clearly
he was wondering if this eccentric-looking character's
conclusions could be relied upon. Winser stepped forward.
`Perhaps I could check your calculations, Doctor?'
   For a moment the Doctor frowned. Jo held her breath,
fearing an explosion. Then, to her relief, he gave one of his
sudden charming smiles. `Please do, my dear fellow.' He
handed the clipboard to Winser. `As you can see, the thing
appears to be some kind of vehicle. Only there doesn't
seem to be any trace of life on board--not life in the
conventional sense... Just listen to this.' The Doctor began
adjusting the controls. A deep throb, throb, throb, filled
the little control room, and a regular light-trace flashed
across a monitor screen.
   Winser said slowly, `It sounds like...' His voice trailed
away as if he was unable to believe his own thoughts.
   `That's right,' said the Doctor. `It sounds like a giant
heartbeat...'
   On the other side of the control room a head-phoned
technician said excitedly. `There's something coming
through on the audio circuits. I'll put it on full
amplification.'
   Seconds later a sibilant voice filled the air. `Axos calling
Earth, Axos calling Earth...' The whispering voice was
weak and erratic as if the speaker was using the last of his
energy. `Fuel system exhausted... request immediate
assistance... Axos calling... request assistance...' The
pleading voice faded away.
   The Doctor rubbed his chin. `Doesn't sound very like a
threat, does it? More of a call for help.'
   Chinn grasped the Brigadier's arm. `If they are weak,
Brigadier, now's the time to attack, before they can
organise their defences!'
   The Doctor said, `Before you have another go at
annihilating the thing, Brigadier, may I make a
suggestion?'
   `Well, Doctor?'
   `Why don't we just go and take a look at it?' The Doctor
made for the door. As Jo started to follow him, he said, `I'm
sorry, Jo, not you.'
   The Brigadier nodded. `Quite agree. Captain Yates, you
will stay here as liaison officer. Look after Miss Grant.
Sergeant Benton, you check the perimeter guard.'
   The control room emptied rapidly as everyone began to
leave. Chinn hung around indecisively, clearly reluctant to
leave the safety of the control room. The Brigadier paused
in the doorway. `Well, Mr Chinn, aren't you going to join
us? You are our Co-ordinator, you know.'
   Reluctantly Chinn followed the Brigadier, and Jo was
left alone with the technician and Mike Yates. Giving him
an appealing smile, she started for the door. `Mike,
couldn't I just...'
   Yates stepped quickly in front of her. `No you couldn't!
You heard the Brigadier.'
   Jo glared mutinously at him. If there was one thing she
hated it was being looked after, particularly when there was
something exciting going on. She was about to start
arguing when Benton reappeared in the doorway. `Sir,
we've found a body!'
   `Where?'
   `In the trees, behind that mound thing. There's a car,
too. Big American job.'
   `All right, Sergeant. I'll come and take a look.'
   As Jo started to follow them out of the control room,
Benton stopped her. `Better stay here, Miss Grant. It's not
too pleasant to look at.'
   Benton too, thought Jo indignantly. It was a conspiracy!
She opened her mouth to protest--then closed it and sat
meekly on a stool. `All right, I'll wait here.'
   Jo stayed on her stool just long enough to allow Yates
and Benton to get clear, then nipped smartly out of the
door.
   On the steps of the Mobile H.Q. she paused, looking
around. Should she follow Yates and Benton and take a
look at the mysterious corpse, or try to catch up with the
Doctor and his party? Deciding that an alien spaceship was
a bigger attraction than a dead body, Jo started running
quickly towards the mound.
   At the edge of the clump of trees Yates was gazing
incredulously at the wizened body of a bearded old man. It
lay on its back, stiff hands raised clawlike to fend off some
approaching horror. But it was the condition of the body
that was so extraordinary. It was dried up, completely
mummified, as if it had lain for years under the desert sun.
Yates knelt down and touched the leathery skin. To his
horror the face crumbled away beneath his fingers...
   Not far away, on the other side of the mound, a heated
argument was going on amongst the Doctor's group. Their
inspection of the mound had revealed precisely nothing.
Chinn wanted the thing bombed or at least shelled
immediately, and for all his dislike of the man, the
Brigadier tended to agree with him. Hardiman and Winser
were opposed to this, fearing that such an attack might
cause an explosion large enough to damage the Nuton
Complex. The Doctor took no part in the debate. He stood
staring absorbedly at the mound, running his hand along
the strange gourd-like surface, wishing they'd all go away
and let him take a really good look at it.
   Suddenly the Doctor felt a violent throbbing. He
jumped back as a space appeared before him. The hole
grew and grew until it resembled an arched opening.
Through it a glowing corridor led downwards, deep into
the heart of the mound.
   The little group was stunned. The Doctor was the first
to recover. Waving a hand towards the opening he said
cheerily, `An open door, gentlemen--which presumably
means an invitation to go in. Shall we take a look?'
   Without waiting for their agreement, the Doctor
stepped inside, and slowly the others followed. Jo Grant
came running up just in time to see them all disappear
through the opening. She hesitated for a moment. She'd
wanted to see the mound, but she hadn't reckoned on going
inside it. And suppose the door closed again? Deciding
she'd better risk it, Jo dashed inside.
   She found herself in a kind of tunnel, leading
downwards, its walls aglow with light. Just ahead of her she
could hear the voices of the others. Jo crept along quietly
behind them, not wanting to be seen.
   Ahead of her, the Doctor and his companions came to
an archway. It seemed to lead into a large chamber. One by
one they stepped through. The Doctor waited until last,
watching as the others went by. He noticed that as each
one stepped through the archway multi-coloured lights
played over their faces and there was a faint crackle of
energy. Clearly they were passing through some kind of
scanning system. When the others were all through, the
Doctor himself stepped under the archway. Immediately
he felt his mind gripped by an immensely powerful force.
It seemed to be trying to tear the knowledge from his
brain. Strange lights and patterns whirled before his eyes,
and he felt the tentacles of alien thought groping within
his mind. Only with a mighty effort was he able to break
free of their grip and force himself through the archway.
Half-collapsing, he staggered into the chamber beyond.
   (Deep inside Axos the Doctor's analysis pattern
appeared on a screen before the glowing eye. The voice
whispered, `Analysis pattern indicates subject non-typical.
High intelligence, possibly of extra-terrestrial origin.
Investigate!')
   The Doctor became aware that someone was holding
him up and a blurred voice was speaking. `Doctor, what's
happened to you? Are you all right?' Suddenly everything
came back into focus and he saw the worried face of the
Brigadier. `Thought you'd fainted for a moment,' said the
Brigadier gruffly. `Felt a bit dizzy myself going through
that arch. Nothing like so bad as you, though...'
   The Doctor straightened up. `I'm all right now. Full of
surprises, this place.'
   From the corridor, Jo Grant had watched the Doctor's
struggle in the archway. Worried, she peeped through and
saw him, apparently unharmed, talking to the Brigadier. Jo
decided not to risk going through the arch. It seemed to
hold some kind of alarm system which might detect her as
an intruder. If she explored further down the corridor,
perhaps she could steal a march on the others by
discovering the secrets of this strange place before they
did. That would teach them to try and keep her out of
things! Jo crept cautiously on her way.
   Meanwhile the Doctor and his companions were
examining their surroundings. They were in a large oval
chamber, walls, floor and ceiling all composed of the same
strange glowing substance. They looked at each other in
puzzlement. The chamber although impressive was
completely empty. `What do we do now?' whispered the
Brigadier.
   `Wait. We've been brought here for some reason...' The
Doctor pointed. `Look, over there!'
   On the far side of the chamber, part of the wall was
becoming transparent. Light flooded from behind it, and
they saw a group of figures standing in an alcove. The
dividing wall simply melted away, and the figures could be
seen more clearly. The group of visitors was frozen in sheer
astonishment. None of them, not even the Doctor, had
imagined anything like the creatures before them.
   There were four of them. They were humanoid in
appearance, and incredibly beautiful. They wore one-piece
silvery garments of simple design, and their skins were a
pale gleaming gold.
   They seemed to be a family. There was a man, a woman,
a boy and a girl. All four stood still for a moment, looking
like golden statues. Then the man stepped forward and the
others followed him. He held up his hand in greeting, and
began to speak. His voice was clear, resonant, and
hypnotically compelling. `Our worlds are uncountable
light-years away on the far rim of the galaxy. Our planetary
system has been crippled by solar flare activity. By now, no
doubt, all of our worlds are totally and permanently
entropised.'
   The Brigadier shot the Doctor an agonised glance of
enquiry. The Doctor whispered, `Drained of all life and
energy!'
   The Brigadier nodded his understanding. The golden
man waved an expressive hand around him. `We are the
Axons. You stand in the heart of Axos, all that is left of our
culture.'
   Winser said incredulously, `Then this is some kind of
spaceship? You built it for your journey?'
   The Axon shook his head. `Not built. As you see our
technology has taken a different path from yours. The ship
was grown, from a single cell. Now its nutrient is all but
exhausted. We should like to stay here, to replenish our
energy and nutrition cycles. In return we offer you a gift...
a payment.' He lifted a hand and a low pedestal rose up
before them. On it rested a small golden casket. The
golden man said simply, `Axonite!'
   He lifted the lid and the visitors clustered round. Inside
the casket lay a formless blob that shimmered and pulsed
with light, like some exotic jewel. It blurred and shifted
beneath their eyes.
   The Axon smiled at their puzzlement. `Axonite is the
source of all our technology. Axonite can absorb, convert,
transmit and programme all other forms of energy.'
    `Even radiation?' said the Doctor suddenly. `Even solar
radiation?'
    The Brigadier realised that the Doctor was pointing out
an inconsistency in the Axon's story. With this wonder-
working substance at their command, why hadn't the
Axons been able to solve their own problems?
    Sadly the Axon bowed his head. `Axonite can only
control energy that exists. By the time we realised our
danger, it was already too late.'
    Chinn glared reproachfully at the Doctor, indicating
that his scepticism was in thoroughly bad taste. He turned
back to the Axon. `If you could explain what this substance
is, what it does...'
    `Axonite is the chameleon of the elements. It uses the
energy it absorbs not only to copy but to restructure and
recreate any given substance, if necessary improving on the
original...'
    Chinn looked thoroughly bewildered. Clearly the
Axon's explanation left him no wiser.
    The Doctor interrupted again. `Yet you still ran out of
fuel?'
    Again the Axon bowed his head. `The fault was ours. At
the lowest ebb of our energy cycle, even Axonite cannot
help us. There is no energy left with which it can work.'
    Winser was studying the glowing substance. `The
principle?' he demanded. `What is the principle of
Axonite?'
    `Axonite can be called a thinking molecule. Its sub-
atomic particles behave in an ordered rather than a random
manner. They can be programmed so that every molecule
acts as a micro-computer, linked in turn to every other
molecule.'
    Beside him the Brigadier heard the Doctor whisper,
`Like a kind of brain...'
    The Axon went on, `Surely it would be simpler if I were
to demonstrate Axonite? Then you may take this sample
and examine it for yourselves.' He moved to the recess and
took from it another casket. `We have captured a small
living creature of your planet.' The Axon put his hand
inside the casket and took out a toad, placing it carefully
on the floor in front of him.
    The toad crouched motionless, looking around it with
jewelled eyes. The Axon produced a transparent device
rather like a large hypodermic. A blob of Axonite could be
seen glowing somewhere inside it. He touched the toad
gently on its glistening back. `A painless lasonic
injection...'
    The scene was at once mysterious and absurd, thought
the Brigadier. There they all stood in the glowing heart of
this mysterious space craft, confronting these golden-
skinned, smooth-tongued Axons--and their pet toad!
    Suddenly the toad began to grow. It grew and grew until
it towered over them, transformed from a humble toad into
a terrifying monster. They could see the pulsing of the
enormous throat, the gleam of the huge eyes. The great
mouth opened and the long tongue flicked out... Chinn
screamed and scrambled backwards, cannoning into the
rest of them...
    The Axon touched the monster's back with his device.
`The process is, of course, reversible.' The monster began
to shrink, dwindling with incredible speed until it was
once more a harmless toad, blinking up at them. The Axon
lifted it carefully and returned it to its casket.
    `If this had been one of your food animals... I am sure
you can see the possibilities for alleviating your world food
problems.'
    The Brigadier had a sudden staggering vision of cattle
as big as houses, pigs like giant barrage-balloons. He shook
his head to clear it, and heard the Doctor asking another of
his awkward questions. `Does this process also apply to
inorganic materials? To fissionable material?'
    The Axon nodded gravely. `With certain necessary
adaptations.'
   Winser grabbed Hardiman's arm in a painful grip and
whispered, `We must have it. Whatever they want give it to
them! We must have Axonite!'
   Chinn scrambled to his feet and tried to regain his
composure. He managed to address the Axon in something
like his usual pompous tones. `If the British Government is
to consent to this arrangement, an agreement will have to
be properly negotiated...'
   The Doctor's voice cut across Chinn's flow of words.
`Do you really believe this substance is going to benefit
you? Your world should be allowed to develop at its own
pace...'
   Winser whispered fiercely, `We are being offered the
greatest scientific discovery since--since atomic energy.'
   `Exactly. And look at the use you made of that! It was
touch and go whether you annihilated yourselves...'
   Chinn came to Winser's support. `Brigadier, I must
insist you silence this man. He is jeopardising vital
negotiations...'
   But the Brigadier had reached some conclusions of his
own. `Mr Chinn, if this material leaves this space-ship, it
will do so in my possession. This is a matter for the entire
United Nations. The consequences are of international
importance and the U.N. will decide...'
   Chinn waved a dismissive hand. `This ship is on British
soil, and the offer made by our friends here...'
   The clear voice of the Axon cut across their wrangling.
`Since there is so much disagreement amongst so few--
what of the whole planet? We shall withdraw and give you
time to decide...'
   Followed by his family the Axon stepped back into the
recess. The children disappeared through a small door.
The Axon man and woman stood patiently waiting. For a
moment there was silence. Then the arguments broke out
with renewed force...
Jo Grant moved slowly along the glowing corridor. It
seemed to go on endlessly, winding to and fro so that she
soon lost all sense of direction. Panic-stricken she decided
to go back and find the others. She turned and ran the way
she had come. Suddenly she heard a voice, faint but clear.
It was a man's voice and there was an edge of panic to it.
`Help, help,' it was calling. `Somebody get me out of here.'
   Despite the faintness, Jo recognised the voice
immediately. It was Bill Filer. She remembered Benton's
message just before she left the Mobile H.Q. Something
about a body--and an American car. Jo guessed at once
what must have happened. Filer had got here before them,
and somehow he'd been captured. She moved in the
direction of the voice, calling, `Filer? Mr Filer, where are
you?'
   The faint voice seemed to vibrate along the glowing
walls. `Help... help...' Then it faded away.
   Jo called again, `Mr Filer! Can you hear me?'
   This time there was no reply and she hammered her fist
angrily against the wall. Behind her, the opposite wall of
the corridor began to bulge outwards. The bulge was about
the size and shape of a man.
   But the shape that emerged from it was no more than a
ghastly parody of a man, a shambling shapeless creature
that seemed made up of hundreds of squirming tentacles...
   Alarmed by a sudden rustling noise, Jo swung round.
She screamed as the quivering horror advanced towards
her...
                         4
                 Enter the Master
Bill Filer awoke, his mind still full of the horror of the
great glowing eye. He thought he'd been having a bad
dream till the restraining pressure of the tentacles told him
the nightmare was ghastly reality. For a moment he
panicked. `Help! Help!' he yelled. `Somebody get me out of
here!' For a moment he actually thought he heard a reply,
someone calling his name. `Help! Help!' he yelled again.
   `You're wasting your time, my friend.'
   Filer looked round wildly. Fully awake at last, he
realised that this place of imprisonment had changed. He
was in a small enclosed space, a glowing-walled cell.
Tentacles growing from walls and floor held him firmly in
place. On the other side of the cell, more tentacles were
securing another prisoner. Filer looked curiously at him.
The man wore a dark suit, with a high-collared jacket.
Although he wasn't particularly big, his compact body gave
an impression of immense power. He had a small, neatly-
pointed black beard and dark burning eyes. His voice was
deep and resonant. `Who are you? What is your name?'
   So compelling was the voice that Filer answered without
question. `Bill Filer. American Intelligence.' He gazed
bemusedly at the other man. Surely his appearance was
familiar. No, not his appearance. His description. Filer
struggled to regain his concentration. `And who the hell
are you?'
   The bearded man smiled ironically. `At the moment I
am simply your fellow captive, Filer. In more fortunate
circumstances, I am known as the Master!'
Although Jo didn't realise it, she was now very close to the
chamber where she'd left the others. The sound of her
terrified screams broke up their heated discussion.
   The Doctor dashed out of the chamber and along the
corridor, the Brigadier close behind. Hardiman and
Winser were about to follow when Chinn gestured them to
remain. He turned to the Axon. `Now perhaps we can talk
without perpetual interference from UNIT. About this
agreement...'
    The Axon was not listening. He had pressed his hand to
a section of wall which seemed to grow brighter at his
touch. He stood for a moment as if communing with the
very fabric of the ship, then said politely. `I'm afraid there
is some crisis. I must investigate.'
    `Then perhaps you would escort me from your ship?
Discreetly as possible. I must get in touch with my
Minister.'
    `Of course.' The Axon gestured towards the Axon
woman. She indicated that Chinn should follow her, and
led him towards the small door. The Axon hurried out
after the Doctor. Hardiman and Winser were left gazing
helplessly at each other.
    After a moment Hardiman said doubtfully, `Winser, are
you sure...'
    `I'm sure that Axonite offers the greatest potential for
scientific advancement we've ever known.' There was a
fanatical light in Winser's eyes. `It ties in with my own
research with the Particle Accelerator--immeasurably
more advanced, of course. We must have Axonite, here in
the Nuton laboratories. Whatever the cost...'
The Doctor found Jo crumpled on the floor in a dead faint.
Standing over her was the golden figure of an Axon. For a
moment the Doctor thought that the Axon he'd left in the
chamber had somehow arrived ahead of him, since the
appearance was identical. Same inhumanly handsome
features, same pale golden skin.
   The Axon backed slowly away as the Doctor ran up. He
didn't speak as the Doctor knelt by Jo and examined her.
She was already recovering. After a moment she opened
her eyes and said dazedly, `Doctor?'
   `It's all right, Jo, you're safe now. What happened?'
   `I saw this thing... this monster. It was all slimy and
tentacled...' Jo's voice began rising in panic.
   `Jo--it's all right. There's nothing to be afraid of.' The
Doctor helped Jo to get to her feet.
   Masking his concern with abruptness, the Brigadier
said, `May I ask what you're doing here, Miss Grant? I gave
you explicit orders.'
   `I know. I'm afraid I followed you in. Then I heard Bill
Filer's voice...'
   `Filer--in here?'
   `I tried to find him... then this awful thing appeared. It
came right out of the wall at me...'
   The Axon they had first encountered, presumably their
leader, thought the Brigadier, came quietly up to them. He
looked at his fellow Axon for a moment. Without a word
the Axon turned and walked away. Calmly the Axon leader
said, `I think I can explain. We are close to the organic
power-sources here. Emission from the energy cells, weak
as it is, might still have affected your sense perceptions,
causing you to hallucinate.'
   `What about the voice I heard?'
   The Doctor patted her shoulder. `All part of the
hallucination, Jo.' he said reassuringly. `Even I was affected
when I first carne in. Let's go back to the others.'
In a small communications booth inside the Mobile H.Q.,
Chinn stood impatiently waiting as the UNIT R/T
Operator linked him up with Whitehall. When at last the
call was through Chinn said abruptly. `Just wait outside,
will you?'
   `Sir?'
   `Wait outside!'
   The R/T Operator looked doubtful, but he knew Chinn
was some kind of VIP. He said woodenly. `Very good, sir,'
and left Chinn alone in the little booth. The Minister's face
appeared on the monitor screen. He looked rather like a
cunning old blood-hound. Chinn poured out his story,
careful to emphasise the immense potential value of
Axonite and the obstructive attitude taken by the Brigadier
and his eccentric Scientific Adviser. He explained his plan
for dealing with them, and secured the Minister's
permission to assume special powers. But the Minister's
final words were far from encouraging.
   `You're sure you can handle this, Chinn?'
   `With the special powers I've requested, yes, sir.'
   `Because if you're not, remember this. It's your head on
the block, Chinn, not mine.' With a certain relish in his
voice the Minister went on, `If anything should go awry,
Chinn, your reputation, indeed your whole career will be
ruined. You will bear that in mind, won't you?'
   Chinn gulped. `Yes, sir.'
   `Remember Chinn, no one is indispensable--except me,
of course.'
   `Quite sir. About the special powers...'
   `I'll get in touch with the Regulars right away.' The
Minister was unable to resist a final jibe. `Just keep me
informed, won't you? Remember, you're the man on the
spot--in more ways than one!' The Minister smiled
appreciatively at his own joke, then the screen went dark.
   Chinn looked at his watch. `Right, Brigadier,' he
thought. `Now we'll see where the real power lies...'
The Axon was concluding a polished speech of apology.
`Naturally I regret that your young female was frightened.
But to wander about our ship was a rash thing to do. Of
course, if Miss Grant would like to see over the ship, we
shall be happy for her to do so. Under the proper
supervision, that is...'
   It was all very smooth and convincing, thought Jo. Too
convincing. She tugged at the Doctor's sleeve and
whispered, `Doctor, I did see that creature. And I did hear
Filer's voice. It wasn't an hallucination: It was real.'
   The Doctor said loudly, `The whole point about
hallucinations is that people do think they're real.
Otherwise they wouldn't be hallucinations, would they?'
   Jo subsided, with a distinct feeling that the Doctor was
letting her down.
   The Doctor strolled across to Hardiman and Winser,
who were studying the specimen of Axonite in its golden
casket. Winser nodded towards Jo. `No ill effects?'
   The Doctor shook his head. `She'll be all right.'
   The Axon moved towards the door in the recess. `I will
leave you, gentlemen. Until the question is settled.'
   The Doctor watched the Axon go and then asked
breezily, `What question?'
   Winser tapped the casket. `Axonite. Chinn's gone to talk
to his Minister.'
   The Doctor thought hard. It was easy to deduce Chinn's
next move--which meant he must make some
readjustments of his own. He smiled at Winser. `Beware of
the Greeks bearing gifts.'
   `What?'
   `You're referring to the story of the Trojan Horse,
Doctor?' said Hardiman. The Doctor nodded.
   Jo was listening to the conversation in some
puzzlement. She remembered the story of the Trojan horse
from her schooldays. The Greeks had been besieging Troy,
and couldn't get inside. So they'd built an enormous
wooden horse, left it outside the city gates and gone away.
Overcome with curiosity, the Trojans had dragged the
horse inside their city walls. But the horse had been
hollow--and filled with Greek soldiers... She couldn't
quite see how this applied to Axonite.
   Neither could Winser. `These classical allusions are lost
on me, Doctor. I'm a scientist.'
   `So were the Greeks in their way. Unfortunately for
Troy. Pretty little place it was. I used to have a villa there,
right on the sea's edge. You could lie in bed and fish for
your breakfast--before the Greeks destroyed the place of
course...' The Doctor became aware that Hardiman and
Winser were staring at him in utter bafflement, and
realised that his free and easy attitude to Time was causing
some confusion. Hurriedly he said, `Still, no use dwelling
in the past, eh? We must look to the future.'
   Hardiman seized his opportunity. `And the future of
humanity can benefit enormously from Axonite.'
   `The advantages will be enormous...' agreed Winser.
   `The material advantages, perhaps.' The Doctor took the
casket from Winser's hands and looked at the pulsating
substance within. `I doubt if even Axonite can increase the
growth-rate of human common sense.' He shut the lid of
the casket with a bang. `However, since everyone is clearly
hell-bent on getting hold of it, may I suggest that we
confine it initially to your own labs? At least until we can
make a proper analysis of all its properties?'
   Hardiman seized on the key word. `We? Are you
offering to co-operate with us, Doctor?'
   `Scientifically, yes.'
   Hardiman looked at his colleague. `Winser?'
   `That depends.'
   `On what?'
   `On who is to lead the investigation.'
   Hurriedly the Doctor said, `Why you do, of course. My
contribution would remain completely anonymous.
Security reasons, you see.'
   Winser smiled, thinking of the articles in scientific
publications, the conferences, the books, even the Nobel
Prize...
   `That fellow Chinn's the problem,' muttered Winser.
   `What's he up to, Doctor?' asked Hardiman.
   `I'm not sure. But believe me, Sir George, the longer we
scientists can keep Axonite away from people like Chinn,
the better for all of us.' The Doctor smiled cheerfully at his
new allies.
   Jo sidled up to him. `Doctor, what are you up to? What
about the Brigadier? What about the United Nations?
You're supposed to be working for UNIT.'
   `I wish you wouldn't keep interrupting, Jo. These
matters are rather above your head.' Ignoring her stricken
face, the Doctor turned to Winser. `Do tell me more about
your Particle Accelerator. I gather you've reached a g-factor
of point eight? A remarkable achievement!'
   Winser smiled, pleased that this odd-looking fellow
appreciated the value of his work. His smile vanished when
the Doctor added, `And I imagine that with a factor of say,
one point one, you hope to be able to travel in Time?'
   Winser was astonished. The eventual aims of his
research had been carefully concealed, yet the Doctor had
deduced them with casual ease. Hurriedly revising his
estimate of the Doctor's intelligence Winser said quietly,
`Well, in theory...'
   `But only if the reaction is controllable. With Axonite
perhaps?'
   Winser looked hard at him. `Why not? Clearly Axonite
must have an existence in the fourth dimension... That
being the case...'
   The rest of the conversation was over Jo's head, but she
scarcely bothered to listen. Her mind was full of a shocking
discovery. Now she knew why the Doctor had suddenly
changed his attitude. He didn't care whether Axonite
would be good or bad for Humanity. He wanted it for
himself!
With wriggling and twisting that would have done credit
to a professional acrobat, Bill Filer had man-aged to
manoeuvre his Colt Cobra from his shoulder holster into
his hand. Taking careful aim he fired at one of the
tentacles holding him captive. His second bullet severed
one tentacle, but the others tightened their grip.
   `That won't help you, Filer.'
   Filer said nothing. He knew the Master was right. Even
if he scored a hit every time--which he wouldn't --there
were still too many tentacles and too few bullets.
Persuasively the Master continued, `If you'll only listen to
me, we can both escape.'
   `Oh, sure.' Filer gave a scowl of frustration. Here he was
just a few feet from the man he'd been hunting--and he
couldn't do a thing about it.
   The Master went on talking. Despite himself Filer
found his attention caught and held by the deep,
persuasive voice. `Listen, Filer! We are both prisoners of
Axos. Whatever our differences we must join forces.'
   `What is Axos? Where do they come from?'
   `Nowhere.'
   Filer said stubbornly. `Everything's gotta come from
somewhere.'
   `No, Filer. The Axons have no home planet. If you like,
this ship is their planet. They float in space, searching for
food, for energy. They are scavengers of the universe...'
   `So how come they chose Earth? Did you bring them
here?'
   `I had no choice. They captured me, absorbed me. They
forced me to bring them to a living planet. It was the price
of my freedom. And then they tricked me. If you don't
help me, Filer, this whole world, your world, will be
doomed.'
   Filer considered. `O.K. I can't get in any worse mess.
What do I do?'
   `You see that small nodule, high up in the wall? It is the
nerve centre of this cell. If you can hit it, the shock will
disorientate it, at least temporarily.'
   `And that'll give us our chance?'
   `Our only chance! `
   Filer looked doubtfully at the tiny projection. He was a
fine pistol shot, and under normal conditions he would
have felt pretty confident. But conditions were anything
but normal. Trussed hand and foot, in poor light. he would
have to shoot at a half-seen target with his hand stretched
awkwardly across his body. Taking the best aim he could,
he fired. A tiny hole appeared at the edge of the nodule.
Filer looked at the Master. `So? Nothing happened.'
   `You must hit the centre, Filer. The exact centre.'
   Filer fired again--and again. The shots were close --but
not close enough. He looked at the Master. `Last chance!'
Taking careful aim, he squeezed the trigger with agonising
slowness. The revolver cracked --and a hole appeared in
the very centre of the nodule.
   Immediately there was chaos. The tentacles loosened
their grip and lashed aimlessly about. Lights flickered
madly and even the walls and floor seemed to ripple with
shock. The Master gripped the inter-twined tendrils that
formed one wall and ripped them apart. When the gap was
big enough, they forced their way through it and tore off
down the corridor.
Jo was still trying to convince the Brigadier of the Doctor's
treachery. `You know how obsessed he is with getting the
TARDIS going again? Well, he's talking Time Travel with
Winser. He's got the idea that Axonite will help him to get
away from Earth.'
   The Brigadier looked doubtful. It was true enough that
escape from Earth in the TARDIS was the Doctor's prime
concern. He'd only taken the job with UNIT in return for
laboratory facilities to work on his TARDIS. Even so, he'd
given valuable help in the past and the Brigadier found it
hard to accept that his old friend was planning to betray
him. Worriedly he said, `Keep an eye on the Doctor by all
means, Miss Grant. It's Chinn I'm worried about. He's
been away for ages now. What's he up to?'
   As if on cue Chinn bustled back into the chamber, the
Axon leader beside him. Chinn was in high spirits. `It's all
over, Brigadier. I've reached full agreement with our friend
here.'
   The Brigadier realised that he'd been outflanked. Chinn
had been back in the Axon ship for some time--engaged in
a private conference with the Axon leader. Importantly
Chinn went on, `Britain now has the world rights to
Axonite.' He took the casket from Winser and tucked it
possessively under his aim.
   The Brigadier's voice was cold. `You leave me no
alternative, Mr Chinn.' He drew his revolver and levelled it
at the astonished civil servant. `I'll take charge of that.'
Taking the casket from Chinn the Brigadier gestured with
the revolver. `Now then everyone--shall we go?'
    Herding Chinn ahead of him, the Brigadier led them
from the chamber. The Axon stood silently watching,
making no attempt to stop them. When he stood alone in
the chamber a sibilant voice filled the air.
    `Energy crisis in cell area. Investigate.'
    The Axon turned to leave. Before he did so he spoke to
the Axon woman. `Further personalisation unnecessary.
Commence reabsorption.' He hurried away.
    The beautiful golden-skinned woman stepped back
against the wall. Her beauty dissolved into a mass of
writhing tentacles which in turn merged into the wall of
the ship. Now she was once more part of Axos.
    The journey back to the Mobile H.Q. was made in an
awkward silence, everyone preoccupied by their own
thoughts. Chinn appeared suspiciously cheerful for
someone who'd just suffered a major defeat.
    The Brigadier waved his party into the Mobile H.Q. At
the top of the steps, he stopped in astonishment. The
control room was full of armed soldiers. Yates and Benton
stood stiffly to attention covered by a corporal's sten-gun.
A Regular Army Captain was standing by Chinn's side.
    The Brigadier exploded. `Yates, Benton, what the blazes
is going on here?'
    It was Yates who replied. `Regulars just moved in and
took over, sir.'
    `Took over?'
    Benton nodded sheepishly. `Took us all by surprise, sir.
I mean--we couldn't very well open fire.'
    `What about the rest of the men?'
    This time it was Chinn who answered the question.
`They have all been arrested.'
    With a sudden movement he snatched the golden casket
from under the Brigadier's arm. `And so, Brigadier, have
you.'
                     5
          The Doctor Makes a Plan
For a moment the Brigadier was literally speechless with
rage. There was a tense silence in the crowded control
room. Then, in a voice choked with anger, he began, `You
have no right...' He moved to recover the casket, only to
find one of the soldiers barring his way with a levelled
sten-gun.
   Chinn smiled triumphantly. `On the contrary, I have
every right, Brigadier. You and your people are all under
arrest. I have been granted special powers by the Minister.'
   Ignoring Chinn, the Brigadier snapped, `I must warn
you, Captain...?'
   `Harker, sir.'
   `... Captain Harker, that this is an illegal act.'
   `I'm sorry, sir. I must follow my orders.'
   The Brigadier nodded, understanding his fellow-
soldier's discomfort. `Very well. Mr Chinn, I submit under
protest. I shall make every attempt to inform the U.N.'
   `Thank you for the warning, Brigadier. Captain Harker,
I want these men under twenty-four hour armed guard,
inside the Complex. They are to communicate with no one,
you understand? No one! If you need me I shall be at the
Nuton Complex myself.'
   Chinn, Hardiman,and Winser left. Seconds later, came
the sound of their car driving off. Captain Harker moved
over to the Brigadier. `I must ask for your weapon, sir.'
   Slowly the Brigadier drew his service revolver and
handed it over.
   `Thank you, sir. Now, if you'll all come with me?'
   The Brigadier, Yates and Benton were escorted from the
room by the soldiers. The Captain waited, looking
enquiringly at the Doctor and Jo, who hadn't moved.
   Almost absent-mindedly, the Doctor waved him away.
`Your orders don't apply to us, young man. We're both
civilians, aren't we, Jo?'
   Jo nodded, although actually they were nothing of the
sort. They were both members of UNIT, and she was quite
sure that Chinn had intended them to be arrested with the
others.
   Harker looked worried. `I shall have to check with Mr
Chinn, sir.'
   `Then do so. Now if you don't mind, we have important
work to do.' The Doctor began leafing through a pile of
reports.
   Captain Harker hesitated. There was something very
impressive about the Doctor's air of casual authority. He
was already unhappy about his orders, and he certainly
didn't want to exceed them. `Very well, sir. You can stay
here for the time being. I should warn you that all
communications are in the hands of my own men and
there are armed guards outside.'
   Totally absorbed in his reports, the Doctor didn't seem
to hear him. Harker paused, then went out of the control
room.
   The Doctor looked up at Jo and grinned. `For a while, I
didn't think it was going to work.'
   `Well it won't work, not for long. As soon as he checks
with Chinn, we'll be locked up with the others.'
   `Never mind. We've gained a little time and we must
make good use of it. Now, tell me everything that
happened to you in the Axon ship. I want to know more
about this creature you saw. And are you certain you heard
Bill Filer?'
   `You mean you believe me?'
   The Doctor looked hurt. `Of course I do, Jo. I believed
you all the time.'
Filer and the Master didn't enjoy their freedom for very
long. As they dashed down a corridor they found the
golden form of the Axon leader waiting for them. Tentacles
sprang out from the walls and held them in a remorseless
grip. More Axons appeared and surrounded them.
   The Master became very angry. `I demand that you set
me free. I have kept my part of the bargain. I insist...'
   `Silence!' There was such concentrated malignancy in
the Axon leader's voice that even the Master was quelled.
`Take the human away.'
   The tentacles holding Filer loosened their grip, and two
Axons began dragging him away. He struggled wildly but
the Axons had inhuman strength. `What's going on?' he
yelled. `Where are you taking me?'
   Surprisingly the Axon leader answered him. `To the
replication section.'
   The Master watched dispassionately as his fellow
prisoner was dragged away. `Goodbye, Filer. I don't think
we shall be meeting again.'
   The Axon leader turned to his helpers. `Take the Time
Lord back to his cell.' Remorselessly, the golden figures
closed in on the Master.
Jo finished her story and looked up at the Doctor. `What's
going on, Doctor? What is Axonite, really?'
   `Beads and tinsel for fools and savages... and something
more. Why should they foist this gift on Earth? What do
they want?' The Doctor frowned. `Frankly, Jo, I find
myself in something of a quanchy.'
   Jo remembered the Doctor's conversation with Winser,
the interest he'd shown in the possible applications of
Axonite to Time travel, `About which side you're on? For a
while I thought you were changing sides.'
   The Doctor seemed determined to change the subject.
He tapped the pile of UNIT reports. `What about this car
they found? And the body?'
   Jo shrugged. `The car was Filer's all right. The body
disintegrated when they touched it.'
   `So it could have been Filer?'
   `No! I tell you I heard him. He's still alive, inside the
Axon ship.'
   `I only hope you're right, Jo.'
   `I tell you he's in there. And we've got to get him out.
We'll make the Axons let us search the ship.'
   A familiar, hated voice spoke out. `You will do no such
thing.' Chinn was in the doorway, Winser and Captain
Harker by his side. He marched up to Jo and said angrily,
`There will be no search. As far as I am concerned, the man
Filer has ceased to exist.'
Struggling against restraining tentacles, Filer was once
more a helpless captive, this time in another part of the
Axon ship. He sensed he was somewhere close to the power
sources. The walls glowed more brightly, and a deep
throbbing filled the air. Bright multi-coloured lights
flashed before his eyes, and waves of dizziness swept over
him.
   Dimly Filer became aware that something was
happening to the wall opposite him. A long bulge was
forming, swelling out... A bulge about the size and shape of
a man. Filer struggled wildly as the bulge became a
writhing many-tentacled monster. It changed again into
the familiar golden form of an Axon. Then the creature
began a third and final change, and Filer's eyes widened in
horror at the unbelievable sight before him... He was
looking at himself.
Jo used every argument she could think of to persuade
Chinn to search for Filer. But she soon realised she was
wasting her time--Chinn simply refused to listen. Finally
she turned away in disgust. `All you care about, Mr Chinn,
is your contemptible under-hand deal with the Axons!'
   `That agreement is vitally important, young lady, and I
will allow nothing to prejudice its success. This man Filer
is not going to cause an unpleasant incident. There will be
no search. The man is expendable and that is that!' Chinn
paused for breath. `Captain Harker, have them both taken
to the Complex and put them with the Brigadier.
Remember, they are to be held incommunicado--no
contact with anyone.'
    Suddenly Winser said, `Take the girl by all means. But
not the Doctor. He's going to help me with the preliminary
investigations of Axonite.'
    Chinn thought for a moment. `Very well. But remember
this, Doctor. The slightest hint of sabotage or delay--and
it's your head on the block, not mine.'
    The Doctor ignored him, and turned to Winser, `After
you, my dear fellow. I can't wait to begin our
collaboration.'
    As Winser and the Doctor moved off, Jo said sadly, `So
you have changed sides after all, Doctor?'
    The Doctor paused in the doorway, and gave her a
benign smile. `A matter of basic loyalties, my dear. I'm
afraid mine must always be to science.'
The Master looked up as the golden figure of the Axon
leader entered the cell. `Well? Am I to be released?'
   `Perhaps. This indeed is a rich planet you have brought
us to.'
   `Then set me free!'
   `In due course. As yet we have only gained a foot-hold
on this planet. For us to achieve the maximum nutrient
value, Axonite must encircle this world within the next
seventy-two Earth hours...'
   `And something's gone wrong?' The Master looked
keenly at his captor, sensing that there was a reason behind
this visit.
   Briefly the Axon told of the agreement reached with
Chinn. `We were forced to accept his terms. The Doctor
and the Brigadier were suspicious. They might have
refused to accept Axonite. The greed of the human called
Chinn blinded him to all dangers.'
   The Master laughed scornfully. `And now your hands
are tied. For Axonite to be distributed world-wide this
secret agreement must be broken. I can do that for you--if
you give me my freedom. We made a bargain...'
   `But the contract is not yet completed. The bargain, you
remember, was that if we spared you and your TARDIS,
you would lead us to this planet.'
   `As I have done!' The Master's voice was savage. `And
you made me a further promise. The death of the Doctor--
and the destruction of all life on this miserable planet.'
   `Of course. But when this Doctor visited our ship, our
sensors detected something you failed to tell us. The
Doctor is also a Time Lord, is he not?'
   Two more Axons carried the unconscious body of Filer
into the cell, and flung it into a corner.
   The Axon raised a hand and the tentacles holding the
Master relaxed their grip. `Come. You may explain your
plan. But remember--no one is irreplaceable.'
The Doctor stood looking round Winser's laboratory, a
fixed expression of admiration on his face. Privately he was
thinking that Winner's equipment was both primitive and
clumsy. But it might serve his purpose. A plan was
beginning to form in the Doctor's mind...
   Dominating the enormous laboratory was Winser's
pride and joy--the Particle Accelerator. It was a
complicated piece of equipment resembling in appearance
a massive electronic cannon. In the centre of the `barrel'
section was a transparent door, made of heavy-duty plastic,
and just in front of the giant machine stood a three-sided
control panel.
   The Doctor glanced casually around the huge circular
room, taking his bearings. It was rather like being on the
inside of a vast pottery kiln. An iron staircase led to a
viewing gallery, and just above the gallery was the main
control room. A huge picture window looked from it onto
the laboratory. The Doctor could see Chinn peering
suspiciously down at him, Hardiman at his side. The
laboratory was in a separate wing, and the Doctor knew
that there were armed soldiers outside. Chinn wasn't
taking any chances with his precious Axonite. The golden
casket stood on a laboratory bench nearby.
   The Doctor walked round the Particle Accelerator, his
mind rapidly absorbing Winser's explanations. Winser
touched a massive lever. `These sub-controls are linked to
those in the main control-room up there--this lever brings
in the entire output of Reactor One.'
    The Doctor nodded. `And with that colossal surge of
power you accelerate the particles in an ever-increasing
electromagnetic field?'
    Winser nodded, surprised at how quickly the Doctor
had grasped the purpose and function of the complex
machinery. `Precisely. Eventually I expect to achieve
controlled acceleration up to and beyond the speed of light.'
There was a fanatical gleam in Winser's eyes and his voice
was hushed. `Once beyond that, the particles will be
travelling in the fourth dimension... and I shall begin my
experiments into the nature of Time itself.'
    `With the ultimate aim of achieving Time travel?'
    Winser nodded eagerly, relieved to find a fellow
scientist who didn't think his theories too wild even to
discuss. `Why not?'
    `Why not indeed?' The Doctor beamed at him. `Well,
it's all most impressive. Much larger than my own set-up of
course,' he added casually. `Mine's only about the size of...
well, say a police box.'
    `Your set up? You mean to tell me you've already been
working with...'
    `With a Time machine? Oh yes, very successfully too,
for a while. Then I ran into some snags.'
    The snags to which the Doctor referred were the laws of
his own people, the Time Lords. As part of his sentence of
exile to Earth, they had somehow prevented the TARDIS
from functioning. In addition, they had clouded that part
of the Doctor's memory that held the vital Temporal
Equations, so that he was unable to repair it. But the
Doctor was still determined to outwit them. Perhaps, in
conjunction with Winser, he could somehow re-discover
the information he needed. He sighed theatrically. `Bit of a
lash-up, the old TARDIS. But it functioned. I wish you
could have seen it when it was working...'
   Winser was still grappling with the Doctor's
extraordinary claim. `Why have I never heard of this
research? You've published nothing?'
   `Er, no. Well, not in England, anyway.'
   `Where then?'
   `Oh, elsewhere. You see, old chap, I had a sort of
breakdown. Believe me, afterwards I was a changed man!
There are quite a few things I still can't remember.'
   `How convenient!'
   The Doctor shook his head. `Most inconvenient,
actually.' A sudden thought seemed to strike him. `Still if
you'd be interested in having a look at the old TARDIS,
perhaps we could have it brought down?'
   Winser gave him a puzzled look. `Are you really serious
about all this?'
   The Doctor put a friendly hand on Winser's shoulder.
`Quite serious, I assure you. We could swop a few ideas...
cannibalise a few parts. Perhaps even get the old TARDIS
operational.' He crossed to the laboratory bench and put
his hand on the lid of the golden casket. `Now we've got
this stuff--we might as well make good use of it! `
The Master walked into the brain area of Axos, then
stopped short in astonishment. Before the great eye on its
flexible stalk stood a familiar figure. Filer! Not the
exhausted, broken figure he had last seen but a new Filer,
fresh and alert. The whispering voice of Axos filled the air
around them.
   `The other Time Lord will be with the Axonite. You
will find him and bring him here.'
   The Axon with the face and body of Filer nodded stiffly
and walked away.
                        6
                Escape from Axos
`No, Doctor! I simply won't hear of it!'
   The Doctor groaned. His collaboration with Winser was
getting off to a very poor start. The trouble was that
Winser, being a careful and logical man, liked to carry out
his experiments in a succession of careful and logical steps.
The Doctor on the other hand favoured a more empirical
approach--or as he himself expressed it, `try it and see'. It
was this attitude that was drawing such anguished protests
from Winser. The Doctor stood by the Particle
Accelerator, the golden casket in his hand.
   `All we do is put the Axonite in here and whizz it about
until we crack it down into particles!'
   Winser was horrified. `Far too dangerous. The whole lot
could blow up.'
   `But don't you see, it's the simplest way to break the
Axonite down.'
   `Doctor, if you think I'm going to risk fifty million
pounds worth of equipment... And how would we analyse
the results?'
   `If Axonite is a "thinking molecule", it should analyse
itself. All we have to do is link up with the computer and
read the print-out!'
   `Analyse itself, indeed.' Winser beckoned a hovering
assistant. `That spectroscope set up yet?'
   The assistant nodded, so intimidated by the row that he
scarcely dared speak. Winser took the casket from the
Doctor and marched to the far corner of the laboratory.
   The Doctor watched him in disgust. `Spectroscope,' he
muttered. `You might just as well look at it through a very
large magnifying glass!'
   Winser turned. `What was that, Doctor?'
   `Oh nothing, my dear fellow. Just coming! `
   Muttering `Pompous ass,' (but well under breath this
time) the Doctor followed Winser across the lab.
Filer awoke slowly, his mind in a whirl of panic. Golden
men and tentacled monsters had been bad enough. But
seeing one of the Axon monsters turning into a copy of
himself had been almost too much. Now Filer knew he had
to escape. The Axons had created his replica for some
purpose of their own--and whatever it was, he had to stop
them.
   Filer looked round. He was back in the cell area, alone
this time. Tentacles were holding him--but their grip was
slack and weak. He moved, and the tentacles tightened.
Filer lay very still, thinking hard. Clearly the tentacles
were activated by movement. The more he struggled the
tighter they would grip, So if he moved very, very slowly...
Cautiously, inch by inch, Filer began edging towards the
cell exit.
The Master stood in the Brain area, scrutinised by the Eye
of Axos. He was pleading for his freedom with all the force
at his command. `I know the ways of the humans,' he
urged. `I can move freely, I am familiar with their
organisations, their system. You do not have time to learn
these things. If your Nutrition Cycle is to be activated
within the next seventy-two hours, you must have world-
wide distribution of Axonite.'
   Behind the eye a part of the wall became a screen.
Light-patterns flowed across it as the computer-like Brain
of Axos considered and checked the Master's arguments.
Then the Voice said, `Data confirms feasibility of alien's
plan. Motivation questionable. Decision... release Time
Lord but retain Time Capsule until successful completion
of mission.'
   The Master cursed silently. The Brain had guessed his
intentions all too well. Once free of Axos he had planned to
make one further attempt to kill the Doctor and then leave
Earth, leaving the Axons to succeed or fail on their own.
Now he was trapped, committed to helping the Axons as he
had promised. As if to taunt him, a far recess of the Brain
area lit up, revealing a plain white dome--about the size of
a police box. It was the Master's TARDIS, in its basic,
uncamouflaged form. He looked longingly towards it.
   `I must have my TARDIS. Give it back to me.'
   There was a mocking tone in the sibilant Voice.
`Negative. The Time Capsule is not needed for success of
mission.'
   `At least return my laser-pistol. I may need to defend
myself.'
   `Return of weapon is acceptable. Retention of Time
Capsule will prevent hostile action.'
   The Axon leader produced a stubby laser-pistol and
handed it to the Master, who concealed it beneath his coat.
`Come,' he ordered, and led the Master away.
Filer walked very slowly, very calmly along the corridors of
Axos, trying to find his way to some kind of exit. His every
instinct screamed at him to run at top speed, but logic told
him that this would trigger off Axon alarm systems. Step
by step, he made his way, pausing only when he saw
movement at a corridor junction. It was the Master, the
Axon leader beside him. Keeping a safe distance, Filer
began to follow them.
   They led him through the maze of corridors, pausing at
last in one which ended in a blank wall. The Axon raised
his hand and a door slid back revealing a gleam of light.
With a surge of hope, Filer realised they had reached an
exit. The Master moved through the door. It began to close
behind him...
   Filer broke into a run. He hurtled down the short
corridor, flashed by the astonished Axon leader and threw
himself through the rapidly closing gap. Behind him he
heard the sudden clamour of the Axon alarms.
The Master was already running towards the clump of
trees. An armed sentry appeared before him. `Halt!'
   Immediately the Master collapsed, gasping, `I escaped...
they were keeping me prisoner...'
   As the sentry leaned over to help the Master to his feet,
the Master smashed him to the ground with one savage
blow. He ran quickly away into the trees.
   A few minutes later, Filer came across the unconscious
body of the sentry, and guessed it was the work of the
Master. Filer drew his gun and reloaded it, then set off for
the Nuton Complex at a run.
The Doctor and Winser examined the blob of Axonite as it
sat smugly within its casket. They had subjected it to every
imaginable laboratory test, and come up with precisely
nothing. Winser slammed his fist down on the bench.
`Dammit, it must show some response to something.'
    The Doctor shook his head. `It's programmed not to.
It's deliberately resisting analysis.'
    Winser regarded him bitterly. `Well go on--say, "I told
you so".'
    `I told you so,' repeated the Doctor obligingly. `Now
perhaps you'll listen. Particle acceleration is the only
answer. Break it down and force it to analyse itself!'
    `No. I won't risk my equipment.'
    `Then will you risk mine?'
    `I thought you said this... TARDIS wasn't working.'
    `Ah well--there is a certain malfunction in the drive
system, but the rest is all right. If we could link through to
the reactor and bypass the malfunction...'
    Winser began to look more hopeful. `If your equipment
is compatible with my Particle Accelerator... it might
work...'
    And so might the TARDIS, thought the Doctor, though
he didn't say so aloud. `Well, it's worth a try, isn't it? After
all, what else is there left to use? Now if you can convince
the powers that be to bring my TARDIS down here... It's
not far away, at UNIT H.Q.'
    `Just you leave it to me.' Winser marched towards the
iron staircase with the air of a man determined to stand no
nonsense.
   The Doctor smiled, and looked at the casket of Axonite.
`And now for you, my friend,' he murmured quietly. The
Doctor was sure Chinn wouldn't agree immediately--
which meant Winser would be tied up for quite some time.
   Carefully picking up the golden casket, the Doctor
moved towards the Particle Accelerator.
   He put the Axonite down on the console, and began
adjusting control-settings. He had just pulled back the
transparent door when he heard the lab door open.
Presumably Winser had returned unexpectedly... But when
he looked up he saw that it wasn't Winser. It was Filer.
`Filer, my dear chap. Did you escape?' There was no reply.
The Doctor looked again. The newcomer certainly looked
like Filer, exactly like him. But he held himself with a
certain stiffness, and the face was completely
expressionless. The Doctor had encountered human
replication before, during his battle with the Autons. So
despite the amazing resemblance, he wasn't deceived by
the creature that stalked towards him. This Filer was a
fake.
   The Doctor was even more sure when the replica spoke.
The flatness of the voice was another give-away. `Come
with me, Doctor. You must come to Axos.'
   `Nonsense,' said the Doctor briskly. `I've no intention of
coming with you anywhere. You're not Filer.'
   `Come to Axos.' The replica seized the Doctor's arm in
an iron grip, repeating the phrase like a broken record.
`You must come to Axos.'
   The Doctor felt himself being dragged towards the
laboratory door. Only his knowledge of Venusian Aikido
enabled him to break free. He gripped the replica's arm,
twisted, threw... The fake Filer reeled across the laboratory
and slammed into a bench, sending retorts and test tubes
crashing to the floor.
   A human being would have been stunned by such a fall.
But the Axon stumbled to its feet and headed back towards
the Doctor. `You will come to Axos.' Its arm flashed out
with amazing speed, clubbing the Doctor to the ground.
The Axon began dragging him to the door.
   Suddenly another, identical figure appeared in the
doorway--the real Filer. The replica dropped the Doctor,
and moved in to the attack.
   Confronted by his double, Bill Filer reacted with swift
efficiency. He sprang forward and delivered two swift
chopping blows which should have knocked the creature
out. It ignored the blows, moving forward remorselessly.
Bill Filer backed away drawing his Colt Cobra. `Doc, keep
down,' he yelled, and pulled the trigger again and again.
   The crash of the heavy revolver filled the laboratory.
The impact of the bullets sent the replica staggering
back--but that was all. Recovering its balance it stalked
forward once more...
   Abandoning his gun, Filer closed with it. They fought
fiercely, exchanging savage blows. Like the Doctor before
him, Filer found himself no match for the Axon's inhuman
strength. He managed to trip it and send it staggering...
Filer grabbed a lab stool to smash down on the Axon--and
the Doctor staggered dazedly to his feet and grabbed him.
Desperately the real Filer yelled, `No, Doc, no... it's me! `
   The Doctor realised he was wrestling with the real flesh
and blood. Releasing Filer he swung round. They were just
in front of the Particle Accelerator--and the Axon replica,
on its feet once more, was rushing towards them. They
jumped aside, Filer thrust out a foot--and the Axon shot
straight through the open door of the Particle Accelerator.
Quickly the Doctor slammed the door shut behind it,
leaped to the power-lever and yanked it up to maximum.
   Through the transparent door Filer looked on in horror
at what seemed like his own destruction. The Axon replica
disintegrated in the fierce blast of energy, turning first to a
seething blob of Axonite, and then to a fine powdery dust.
Shuddering, Filer turned away. `I'm sure glad that wasn't
me in there!'
   The Doctor was at the control, closing down the Particle
Accelerator. `You're sure it isn't?'
   `Am I sure? Doc, you don't think...'
   The Doctor grinned. `No, I don't. Not as long as you go
on calling me Doc. No Axon would ever be so frivolous!'
   Somewhat belatedly an armed guard ran into the
laboratory. The Doctor looked severely at him. `I'm afraid
you're too late, my man. The excitement's over. Now then,
be so good as to take me to the Brigadier! `
The Master stood on a pedestrian footbridge which
spanned the access road to Nuton Complex, studying the
scene before him. His vantage point gave a good view of
the main gate. Agitated sentries were running about like
disturbed ants, and a stretcher-party was carrying away an
unconscious body.
   The Master had just seen the Axon replica of Filer gain
entry to the Complex by clubbing down the sentry.
Minutes later, he had seen the real Filer run through the
unguarded gate. The Master smiled. It seemed almost
certain that the clumsy Axon scheme to kidnap the Doctor
had failed. Unfortunately it had stirred up the Nuton
Complex so much that it was impossible for the Master to
get in and deal with the Doctor himself.
   He stood silently for a moment, pondering his next
move, his black-clad figure almost invisible in the
shadows. An army lorry drove slowly across the compound.
The driver showed a pass to the sentries and drove out of
the main gate, towards the bridge. Acting on impulse the
Master climbed nimbly onto the railing of the footbridge.
As the lorry passed beneath him he dropped neatly onto
the roof.
   The UNIT lorry rumbled steadily along the country
roads. Glancing into his driving mirror, the driver
suddenly saw not the road behind him but a face. A
bearded face with dark burning eyes that stared into his
own. A voice said, `I am the Master. You will obey me. Pull
into the side of the road.' For some reason it was
impossible to disobey that voice. The driver did as he was
told. Once the lorry was still, a black-clad figure climbed
from the roof and into the passenger seat. A few minutes
later, the lorry drove on its way.
As the ranking member of UNIT, the Brigadier had been
confined in one of the Nuton Complex's VIP guest suites.
Yates and Benton shared simpler quarters with the men.
The Brigadier's accommodation was comfortable, even
luxurious, but that didn't make imprisonment any less
irksome. Watched by Jo, the Brigadier was pacing angrily
to and fro, when he heard a familiar voice in the corridor
outside. `Good heavens, man, I know the Brigadier's
incommunicado. I'm incommunicado myself. There's no
reason why we can't talk to each other.'
   In the corridor outside, the sentry was at a loss.
Certainly there seemed no reason why one prisoner
shouldn't talk to another prisoner... To his relief, Captain
Harker came along the corridor. `All right, what's going
on?' The Doctor repeated his demand to see the Brigadier.
Harker considered. `All right. Let him through.' The
sentry opened the door and the Doctor went in. Filer was
about to follow when Harker said politely. `I'm sorry, sir, I
don't think I know you.'
   Hurriedly Filer produced an impressive-looking pass.
`Bill Filer, American Intelligence. I've got orders to
interrogate these guys.'
   Harker looked narrowly at him then nodded. `Very
well.' Filer followed the Doctor into the room, and the
sentry closed the door. Harker lowered his voice. `I'm by
no means satisfied about all this. I'm going to check with
Mr Chinn. Keep them both here till I get back.'
   Inside the suite the Doctor and his friends were having
a rapid reunion. The Doctor was hurriedly bringing the
Brigadier up to date with everything that had been
happening. `So you see,' the Doctor concluded, `after Filer
saw the Master inside Axos, the Axons copied him, and sent
the replica to kidnap me. Then Filer, the real Filer,
managed to escape--and he saw the Axons turning the
Master loose.'
   The Brigadier felt his head spinning with the flood of
explanations. `So what does all this mean, Doctor?'
   `Well, for a start it means that the Axons' whole story is
a pack of lies.'
   `According to the Master they're some kind of space
scavenger,' confirmed Filer. `He said they'd destroy all life
on Earth.'
   `Which also means,' the Doctor continued, `that we must
keep Axonite confined to this Complex till we discover
more about it.'
   The door opened and Captain Harker came in. There
was a revolver in his hand and an armed sentry behind
him. `Nobody move, please. Sentry, take this man's gun.'
Filer handed over his revolver. Harker looked grimly at
them. `Well, you wanted to be here--and here you stay. My
instructions are to confine you all in this suite.'
   He was about to leave when the Doctor snapped, `If you
must "confine" me it had better be in the laboratory. I'm
here to help with the Axonite experiments. Ask Doctor
Winser if you don't believe me.'
   `Doctor Winser happens to be in conference with Mr
Chinn and Sir George Hardiman.'
   `Then take me back to the laboratory, and check with
Winser when he's free. Dammit man, you might at least
put me back where you found me!'
   Harker sighed. `Very well, Doctor. You'll be confined to
the laboratory. But no more expeditions please!'
   The Doctor was hustled out. Jo and the Brigadier found
themselves imprisoned once more--though this time with
Filer for company. Jo squeezed his hand. `Never mind,
Bill. At least it's better than Axos.'
The Master watched a sweating squad of UNIT soldiers
manhandle the Doctor's TARDIS onto a trolley and out of
the laboratory. He smiled ironically to himself. The last
time he had been in UNIT H.Q. it was in the disguise of a
humble telephone engineer, on one of his unsuccessful
attempts to kill the Doctor. It pleased him to return in a
more exalted role--a visiting scientist from the Nuton
Complex, vouched for by the UNIT lorry-driver.
    A little simple hypnosis had soon extracted the driver's
orders and ensured his further co-operation. The Master
was scarcely able to believe his own luck. The lorry was on
its way to UNIT to collect the TARDIS and take it back to
the Nuton Complex. The Master had decided to allow the
driver to carry out his mission--adding one or two little
flourishes of his own.
    He followed the trolley down the corridor then turned
off into another room where a puzzled UNIT R/T operator
sat over his radio. For some time he had been trying to
reach the Brigadier at his mobile H.Q. at Nuton. However
he had only succeeded in reaching a stolid regular army
operator who continually repeated that the Brigadier was
`not available.'
    The operator looked up as the Master came into the
room. `Can I help you, sir?'
    The Master smiled. `You can indeed. I have an
important        message--for     immediate     world-wide
distribution.'
    `I'm sorry, sir. Only authorised personnel can use the
international hook-up.'
    The Master laid a hand on the operator's shoulder. `Ah,
but I'm a special case. I am the Master.' His voice
hardened. `I am the Master, and you will obey me...'
    A short time later, the UNIT lorry was speeding back
towards Nuton, the tarpaulin-covered TARDIS in the
back. The Master sat beside the driver, a satisfied smile
playing on his lips. He found it very appropriate that the
message which would mean the final doom of Earth had
been sent from the heart of the organisation dedicated to
its protection. One bird had been killed. It only remained
to kill the other. When the TARDIS arrived at Nuton, the
Doctor wouldn't be very far away. The Master smiled, and
fingered the laser-gun beneath his coat.
                        7
                 The Axons Attack
Alone in Winser's laboratory, the Doctor was busy at the
controls of the Particle Accelerator. The episode of the fake
Filer had taken up valuable time. He wasn't sure how
much longer he'd have the run of Winser's laboratory. As
he worked, he delivered a running commentary into the
control console's built-in tape recorder. `My dear Winser,'
he began, `I do hope you will forgive this unauthorised use
of your precious equipment. In case of anything going
wrong, I have left you this recording of what not to do! I
am now about to place the Axonite in the Accelerator...'
   The Doctor took the lid from the golden casket, opened
the doors of the Particle Accelerator, and placed the
container inside. Slamming the transparent doors, he
continued recording. `I am planning to split off a stream of
Axonite particles and accelerate them through Time. I'm
already linked to the computer, and my intention is to
force the Axonite to analyse itself on the print-out.'
   The Doctor closed his hand over the main power lever
and began pulling it very slowly towards him. In dealing
with the fake Filer he had been forced to subject the Axon
creature to a single colossal blast of energy, simply in order
to destroy it. The idea now was to stimulate the Axonite
with a series of carefully graduated rises in particle
acceleration. The Doctor wasn't quite sure what would
happen--but he was pretty certain that something would...
   His voice calm and steady, the Doctor continued
recording, as he drew the power-lever slowly back. `Reactor
One activated. Accelerating... point one... two... three...'
Inside the casket, the Axonite began to bubble and boil,
sending off dazzling rays of multi-coloured light, like a
burning jewel. A note of excitement came into the Doctor's
voice. `The Axonite is beginning to react...' He pulled the
lever further towards him. `Acceleration to speed of light...
now!' Seething and bubbling the brightly-glowing Axonite
overflowed the casket. In the laboratory, red lights flashed
warningly, and the overload alarms began to ring...
In the nearby Axon ship the results of the Doctor's little
experiment were even more dramatic. The Axon leader's
golden face disintegrated into a streaming mass, as the
stresses became too great for him to retain his personalised
form. He stumbled towards the Brain. Around him the
whole ship seemed to seethe and bubble, much like the
Axonite in the Particle Accelerator. Since Axos and
Axonite were one, the whole of Axos was disrupted. A
shrill note of alarm filled the air.
   As the Axon leader ran into the Brain area the Eye of
Axos was lashing wildly to and fro on its stalk. There was
hysteria in the whispering voice. `Emergency, emergency!
Nutrition cycle has been activated prematurely. Immediate
recovery of the Axonite sample is essential, essential,
essential...' The voice rose to a scream that echoed round
the ship...
   His golden form now disintegrated into a many-
tentacled mass, the Axon leader ran from the area.
In the Nuton Complex, alarm bells were ringing loudly.
Captain Harker's first thought was that his prisoners must
have escaped. He ran along to the guest suite, relieved to
find the sentry still outside the door. `Are the prisoners in
there?'
   `Far as I know, sir... unless they've broken out by a
window...'
   `We'd better check.'
   The sentry opened the door, and Captain Harker ran
inside--straight into an uppercut from the Brigadier that
dropped him to the carpet, out cold. The astonished Filer
acted by reflex, chopping down the sentry as he followed
Harker into the room. Filer turned to the Brigadier, who
was rubbing his knuckles. `Hey, what's going on? Are we
pulling a break-out?'
    `Sudden impulse,' explained the Brigadier crisply. `All
at once I got very tired of being locked up. Now I must get
a message through to the U.N. You two go and find the
Doctor. I'll join you later.'
    Stepping over the two prone bodies, the Brigadier
marched briskly out of the room. Filer shrugged. `Well, I
guess we'd better do as he says. Where is the Doc?'
    `I suppose he's still in the laboratory,' answered Jo.
`Let's go and see, shall we?'
    Despite the clanging alarm bells, no one tried to stop
them as they ran to the laboratory. They found the Doctor
in front of the throbbing Particle Accelerator, staring in
total absorption at a pulsating blob of Axonite which had
already grown enormously in size. Jo grabbed his arm,
raising her voice above the whine of the machinery.
`What's going on, Doctor?'
    He didn't seem in the least surprised to see her. `Just a
little test, Jo. Look at the Axonite! It's now taking the
entire output of Reactor One and absorbing it. Absorbing
the whole lot, and using it to grow... Marvellous!'
    There was a clatter of footsteps as Winser ran down the
steps from the main control room. He didn't seem to share
the Doctor's enthusiasm. In fact he was almost hysterical
with rage. `What's going on here?' With the strength of
anger he flung the Doctor away from the controls. `Get
away from my equipment, you idiot. You're wrecking the
whole apparatus!'
    Slamming the power-lever back to close-down he ran to
the transparent doors.
    `Winser, don't,' yelled the Doctor. `That's live Axonite in
there!' He was too late. Winser flung open the doors--and
the ever-growing blob of Axonite sucked him in and
engulfed him. He vanished at once, totally absorbed by its
seething mass.
    Jo screamed and turned away in horror. The Doctor
leaped to the transparent doors, and slammed them shut.
Fascinated. he stood staring at the huge mass of Axonite
swelling before them--still growing, despite the shut-down
in power.
    The Doctor spoke softly, almost to himself. `It's just as I
feared. The Axons, their ship, this Axonite. They're all the
same thing!'
    Filer looked at him in disbelief. `I don't get it, Doc.'
    `We're dealing with a single living creature. The copy of
you, Filer, the Axon you saw forming, Jo, this Axonite
here--all part of the same organism. Axonite is just the
dormant state.' The Doctor looked again at the still-
growing mass. `Was the dormant state--until I activated
it!'
    The seething mass of Axonite began slamming itself
against the doors. Filer whispered, `Can't you stop it, Doc?'
    `I've got to--or it could consume the whole planet. I
only hope it's not too late...'
    With a shattering crash, the huge blob of Axonite burst
open the heavy plastic doors and rolled slowly towards
them like a giant boulder, They backed rapidly away. Jo
looked behind them and screamed. Filling the laboratory
door was the writhing, many-tentacled form of an Axon
monster.
    Filer acted by sheer instinct. With lunatic courage he
shoulder-charged the monster, yelling, `Doc, run. Get Jo
out of here!'
    Filer's sacrifice was in vain. One of the monster's
tentacles slashed across his body, there was a fierce crackle
of energy and Filer was hurled clear across the lab. Jo and
the Doctor backed away as the monster bore down on
them. The last thing they heard was the Voice of Axos.
`De-energise them!' Immediately the monster's tentacles
lashed out and they were stunned into unconsciousness.
The tentacles of the monster dragged them both away.
In Hardiman's empty office the Brigadier was on the
telephone. In a stunned voice he was saying, `And you're
absolutely sure? I see. Yes, of course, I'll take over at once.'
Slowly he put down the phone, his mind reeling under the
impact of shattering news. Some time ago a message had
gone out from UNIT H.Q., not only to the U.N. Security
Council, but to every Government and every news agency
in the world. The message told of the Axon landing in
England, and of the supreme benefits of Axonite, which
were being offered not only to Great Britain, but to the
entire planet.
   The sensation and scandal had been immense. Now the
entire world was insisting on immediate supplies of
Axonite, threatening instant attack if the demands were
not met. Great Britain had no alternative but to give way.
The Brigadier was ordered to take over responsibility for
security, pending a full enquiry into the leak. Chinn was to
supervise distribution--acting purely as an administrator.
   The Brigadier looked up as the door opened. Captain
Harker stood in the doorway, covering him with a revolver.
The Brigadier snapped, `You can put that away, Captain.
You won't be needing it.'
   Harker rubbed the bruise on his jaw. `You're still under
arrest, Brigadier.'
   `I very much doubt it.' The Brigadier passed Harker the
telephone. `Here--you'd better check with your H.Q.
Whole situation's changed. Do as I say, man.'
   The Brigadier watched as Harker made the call. He
smiled grimly as a look of sheer astonishment spread
slowly over the Captain's face.
In Winser's laboratory, everything was under control--
Axon control. The seething mass of Axonite had
disappeared--so too had Jo and the Doctor. Chinn and Sir
George Hardiman rushed into the laboratory--to find the
golden form of the Axon leader standing beside the
Particle Accelerator.
   Hardiman stared in amazement. `What's been going on
here? Where's Winser--and the Doctor?'
   Gravely the Axon said, `Your scientists have been killed.
The female also.'
   `Killed? How?'
   `Their bodies were destroyed by an immense blast of
radiation.' His voice was cold and angry. `Our instruments
showed that attempts were being made to interfere with
the very structure of Axonite. Such experiments are
dangerous in the extreme. We came to help--but we were
too late.'
   Hardiman looked round. `We? But there's only you...'
   `My crew have taken the unstable material back to Axos
where it can be safely destroyed. The radiation has already
been neutralised.'
   Chinn's immediate instinct was to find someone else to
take the blame. `Sir George, did you authorise these
experiments?'
   `I authorised normal tests, yes. But Winser went his own
way. Besides... I gather he had some kind of row with the
Doctor fellow. Some experiment Winser thought too
dangerous... Maybe the Doctor--'
   The stern voice of the Axon leader cut across their
discussion. `The blame is for you to decide. Such a thing
must never happen again. Never. Otherwise we shall cancel
the agreement--whatever the cost to ourselves.'
Jo and the Doctor recovered in the Axon cell that Filer and
the Master had once occupied before them. Jo stirred, and
immediately felt the restraining grip of the tentacles. The
Axons had learned the lesson of Filer's escape. Now the
tentacles reacted immediately to the slightest movement.
As Jo struggled, their grip closed even tighter. She called
out in panic, `Doctor, I can't move. What are these things?'
   The Doctor stood relaxed within his bonds, on the other
side of the cell. `We're inside Axos, Jo. The tentacles are
part of Axos too.'
   `Why have they brought us here? What do they want?'
   The Doctor sighed. `I only wish I knew.'
   The golden figure of an Axon suddenly appeared in the
doorway. `Come!' The tentacles around them loosened
their grip.
   The Doctor moved away from the wall. `Come along, Jo.
I think we're about to meet our host!' Gripping her hand
reassuringly, he led her from the cell. They followed the
silent Axon down the glowing corridors.
The Brigadier was listening suspiciously to the Axon's
story. `So--by the time you arrived here, there was no sign
of the Doctor or Miss Grant?'
   The Axon leader shook his head. No one was here--
except this man.' The Brigadier crossed to the crumpled
body in the corner.
   `Filer! Maybe he'll be able to tell us what happened.'
   The Axon leader said, `The man is gravely ill. It would
be better if we were to take him back to our ship for
treatment.'
   `You will do no such thing. He'll be cared for in the
medical wing here. See to it, will you please, Captain?'
   Harker relayed the Brigadier's orders, and two soldiers
began to carry Filer away.
   Chinn was furious. `You forget, Brigadier--you are no
longer in a position to give orders.'
   Captain Harker coughed. `I'm afraid the position has
changed, sir. I've had orders to hand over to the Brigadier.'
   `New orders? I've heard nothing of this...?'
   `Well you have now,' barked the Brigadier. `There's a lot
of work in front of you, Mr Chinn. I suggest you contact
your Minister.' As Chinn almost ran from the room, the
Brigadier turned to Harker. `Release Captain Yates and the
rest of my men immediately. They will assist your own
troops in making a search for the Doctor and Miss Grant.'
He looked at the Axon leader. `Despite this... gentleman's
theory, I am not yet convinced that they're dead.'
Jo cowered away from the terrifying scrutiny of the Eye of
Axos. The Doctor however was quite calm, listening to the
Voice with an expression of polite interest--rather like a
guest whose host insists on telling him some rather lengthy
anecdote.
   `All things must die, Doctor,' whispered the Voice.
`Mankind... this insignificant planet. Axos merely hastens
the process a little.'
   The Doctor raised an eyebrow. `I see. May I ask how?'
The Doctor had a pretty good idea of the answer to his
question. But he was simply playing for time, seeking some
way of escape. Despite his perilous position, it wasn't in his
nature to give up.
   The Voice of Axos continued its whispered explanation.
`Axonite is merely the bait for human greed. Because of
that greed, Axonite will soon be spread across this entire
planet. Then the nutrition cycle will begin.'
   `And what happens then?'
   `We shall consume every last particle of energy, every
cell of living matter. Earth will be sucked dry.'
   `I see,' said the Doctor coolly. `So Axos is simply an
overgrown cosmic parasite! Does this plan of yours have a
time limit?'
   `Axonite must be activated within seventy-two hours of
our landing.'
   The Doctor smiled at Jo. `It looks as if our friend Chinn
is doing the right thing--for the wrong reasons, of course.'
   `What do you mean?' asked Jo shakily.
   `For purely selfish reasons, he intends to confine the
supply of Axonite to Great Britain.'
   There was triumph in the whispering voice. `No longer,
Doctor. That too has been taken care of.'
   `Indeed? Well, am I here purely as an audience for your
boastings--or do you have something else in mind?'
   `You are here because you have knowledge that we need,
Doctor. Knowledge of Time travel.'
Chinn listened shuddering to the Minister's angry voice.
`The whole thing has blown up in our faces, Chinn. There
has been a catastrophic security leak. The world is
insisting on immediate distribution of Axonite. It will take
place immediately. You will see to it.'
   `Yes, sir. As soon as...'
   `Never mind "as soon as", Chinn. Now!'
   `You can depend on me, sir!'
   `Well, just in case we can't--your resignation is on my
desk, Chinn. I've written it out myself. All it needs is your
signature!'
   There was a click and the line went dead. Chinn
slammed down the phone, and buried his head in his
hands. Then he took a deep breath, rallying himself.
   He snatched up the phone again. `Get me Air Transport
command. This is Chinn, here--from the Ministry.'
Sadly Sergeant Benton looked on, as a squad of soldiers
carried the familiar blue shape of the TARDIS into the
corner of Winser's laboratory. Much use it was now, with
the Doctor nowhere to be found. `All right, lads, that'll do.'
He turned to the man beside him. His voice was very
respectful, for the figure beside him, overcoat collar turned
up and cap pulled low, wore the uniform of a General. `I
still think I ought to tell the Brigadier you're here, sir.'
    A clipped military voice snapped, `You will do no such
thing, sergeant. That is a direct order. This is a surprise
inspection. I shall contact the Brigadier myself when I see
fit. Now, where's your Scientific Adviser, this Doctor
fellow?'
    General or no General, Benton wasn't going to tell his
mysterious visitor more than necessary. `I'm afraid I don't
know, sir,' he said--which was true enough.
    `Well, find him and send him in here to me. Meanwhile,
see I'm not disturbed.'
    The General turned away dismissively. Benton said,
`Very good, sir,' saluted and left the laboratory.
    As soon as he was gone, the Master took off his cap and
greatcoat and tossed them over a stool. He crossed to the
TARDIS, took a complicated electronic device from his
pocket and spent the next few minutes picking the lock.
When at last it gave way, he went into the TARDIS,
closing the door behind him.
    Once inside, the Master paused, looking round the
control room in horror. It was certainly in something of a
mess, the control console partly dismantled, wires and
electronic circuits scattered everywhere. The Master shook
his head in disgust. `Oh no! What has he been trying to
do?' He knew the answer well enough. The Doctor had
been trying to evade the Time Lords sentence of exile and
get his TARDIS going again. `What a botch up!' He kicked
the console savagely. `Of all the mouldering moth-eaten,
clapped out piles of obsolete old junk! Still, perhaps, it
could be made to work--just possibly. If there's no
alternative.'
   Sadly the Master thought of his own gleaming
immaculate TARDIS, one of the latest models, still held
fast in the grip of Axos. He drew the stubby laser-gun from
his pocket, and stroked it gently. `Now then, Doctor, where
are you? Don't keep me waiting too long...'
The Doctor was conducting a desperate mental duel with
the Brain of Axos.
   `I couldn't help you if I wanted to,' he protested. `The
Time Lords took away my knowledge of Time travel when
they exiled me to this planet.'
   `It is useless to lie, Doctor,' hissed the Voice. `Not all of
your knowledge was taken from you. Besides...' The Voice
took on a seductive note, `We have explored the blocks on
your memory. It is possible that we can free them. We
must have the secret of Time travel. We must!'
   `Must you? Why?'
   `To expand our feeding range!' Greedily the Voice
hissed, `Soon it will be necessary to enlarge the energy
sources available to us. Time travel will give us the power
to range through all Time. Axos will be immortal,
indestructible!'
   The Doctor shuddered at the thought of this voracious
monster roaming not only Space but Time to devour its
prey. Defiantly he shouted, `I refuse to ally myself to... to
such cosmic bacteria!'
   `We shall see.' Tentacles lashed round Jo and the Doctor,
holding them powerless. `Are you aware, Doctor, that
Axonite can absorb the very life-force of a human being?
We have arranged a demonstration for you. You shall see
your companion age to death.'
   There was a crackle of energy and Jo went rigid, her
eyes staring before her. The Doctor struggled wildly, but
he was firmly held. Helplessly he watched as wrinkles and
cracks appeared in Jo's face. Her skin sagged, her hair went
first grey, then white... her body twisted into a crouch. It
was like watching a speeded-up film of the effect of the
passing years. Jo looked thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy...
she was turning into a wizened old woman before his eyes.
Soon she would be dead.
                     8
              The Power Robbers
Eighty, ninety, one hundred... Jo Grant was withering into
old age. The Voice of Axos whispered, `The process can be
reversed, Doctor, but only if it is arrested in time...'
   The Doctor shouted. `Stop! For pity's sake, let her
alone.'
   `You will co-operate?'
   `I can't co-operate. Not even Axos can defy the Laws of
Time. Give me a chance and I'll prove it to you.,
   `Very well.'
   Jo's body seemed to freeze. She began to straighten up.
Her hair went from white to grey, then back to brown. Her
skin smoothed out, cracks and wrinkles disappeared...
Suddenly she was young again. The Doctor sighed with
relief. Jo stared round wildly, aware that something had
been happening, but not sure what. `Doctor? I felt so
strange...'
   `Don't worry, Jo, it's over. You're all right now.'
   Impatiently the Voice of Axos hissed, `Begin, Doctor.
Begin!'
   `What do you want me to do?'
   `Concentrate! You have only to think the Time
Equations. The mind of Axos will do the rest.'
   The Doctor wasn't surprised. He had already guessed
that Axos had a degree of telepathic ability.
   `I assume you know the basic theories? In fact, you
already have the power of Time travel--to a very limited
extent.'
   How did you know that?' There was surprise in the
Voice.
   The Doctor smiled. `I knew from the moment you
eluded the human missiles. How else could you have done
that, but by a Time jump? You reached Earth before the
missiles were fired.'
    `That is so. But we can move only moments in Time. It
is not enough. Begin!'
    The Doctor stared deep into the Eye.
    Jo looked on, only half-aware of what was happening.
She saw an area behind the Eye turn into a kind of screen,
across which flowed a stream of complicated equations.
    The Voice said, `Good. And the power requirements?'
More equations. Now the Voice was angry. `What is this,
Doctor? Remember what will happen if you lie.'
    `Pure mathematics cannot lie. You need a colossal
amount of power to create a Time Field for a being as large
as Axos. Look!' Another equation filled the screen. Even
Jo's shaky grasp of mathematics was enough to tell her that
it represented an immense quantity of power. `There,' said
the      Doctor    triumphantly.     `Your      final power
requirements--well in excess of your total capacity.'
    There was a long pause, then the Voice said, `All data
confirmed.'
    The Doctor waved towards the screen. `There you are
then. You might just as well abandon the idea of Time
travel.'
    The Voice spoke again. `Add the total output of the
Nuton Power Complex to your figures, Doctor.'
    `If you wish. Though there's very little point.'
    The equations changed again. The Voice said
exultantly, `Data confirms Time travel attainable using
additional power from Complex. And we can call upon the
whole of Nuton's power whenever we need it.'
    `How? You can scarcely just walk in and take it.'
Gloatingly the Voice hissed, `On the contrary, Doctor--we
can!'
A huge map of the world had been installed on the wall of
Hardiman's office. Hardiman was at a conference in
London. Around his big office table sat Chinn, the
Brigadier, and the golden figure of the Axon leader. The
Brigadier was making a final, useless protest. `In my view
the whole question of Axonite's distribution should be
shelved until we find the Doctor, and get his report on it'
The Brigadier had recovered much of his confidence, and
Chinn was his old objectionable self again.
   `The Doctor! We shan't be seeing that gentleman again.
If he wasn't killed in the explosion, then he's simply
cleared off.'
   `We have still to search the Axon ship--'
   Smoothly the Axon intervened. `At the present time,
our energies are fully occupied with providing the Axonite
your planet demands. Mr Chinn, perhaps you would show
me the extent of your operation?'
   Eagerly Chinn rose. `Yes, of course. A very efficient set-
up, if I do say so myself.' He took up a pointer and touched
it to the map. `Cape Kennedy, Ottawa, Baikonur, Lop
Nor...' The string of names droned on and on... Chinn
ended with a triumphant flourish of his pointer. `There
you are, gentlemen! Axonite consignments are now on
their way to every major scientific establishment on this
planet.'
   A smile curled the golden lips of the Axon leader. He
thought of all those units of Axonite suddenly coming alive
when the Nutrition Cycle was triggered. Breaking out of
their containers, feeding, growing. Sucking up every atom
of energy, and returning with it to Axos. Then and only
then would Axos depart, leaving behind it the dead husk of
a planet. `Excellent. Truly excellent.'
   Chinn smiled complacently. `Thank you,' he said, with
unconvincing modesty. `Just doing my job.'
   Suddenly the Axon leader went still. In his head there
was a commanding Voice. `Depersonalise. Locate and enter
main reactor. Establish link and transmit power.' The
Axon strode abruptly from the room.
   Chinn, who was still looking at the map, turned and
said, `Yes, I think that more or less wraps it...' He broke
off, realising that the Axon was no longer there. `Funny
chap, that...'
    The Brigadier snorted. `I'm off to see Filer in the
medical wing. I gather they're expecting him to come
round about now.'
    The Brigadier marched from the room. Chinn was left
alone with his map. He was quite unaware that his efforts
had brought considerably nearer the total destruction of
Earth.
    Filer had indeed recovered. Still pale and shaky,
watched over by a hovering nurse, he gave the Brigadier
the true story of the events in Winser's laboratory.
    The Brigadier was highly delighted. `So the Doctor and
Miss Grant weren't killed?'
    `They sure weren't. The Axonite got Winser--then that
spaghetti-monster turned up and clobbered me. My guess
is the Axons have got them.'
    `The Doctor definitely said Axonite was dangerous?'
    `Sure! Said it could drain all the energy from the planet.'
    The Brigadier stood up. `I'm off for a word with
Chinn--not to mention our Axon friends. Maybe we can
still stop distribution. Stay here and rest, Filer.'
    `Not on your life,' yelled Filer. But the Brigadier was
gone. Filer turned on the hovering nurse. `Don't just stand
there, Florence Nightingale. Get me my clothes!'
The Axon leader moved between the concrete buildings of
the Nuton Complex. His humanoid form was already
dissolving into a monstrous many-tentacled figure, the
Axons' basic shape.
   The golden appearance was assumed only to reassure
humans, and maintaining that shape took up much of the
Axon's strength. He needed all his energy for the task
before him.
   A UNIT guard appeared, and stopped at the sight of the
horror lurching towards him. He raised his rifle but the
monster was already upon him. A lashing tentacle, a surge
of energy and the guard crumpled to the ground. The Axon
moved on.
   Nuton's Main Reactor was housed in a squat, blank-
walled building with massive steel doors. Two bored
sentries were on patrol. Boredom changed to unbelieving
terror as the Axon monster turned the corner of the
building and came rushing towards them.
   Shaking off their fear, they opened fire. They poured
shot after shot into the heaving tentacled mass, with
absolutely no effect. The monster seemed to flow towards
them... One of the sentries fled in panic. The other
hesitated too long and was blasted to extinction by the
Axon monster's tentacle.
   The creature moved up to the massive steel doors. Its
tentacles flailed out, there was a massive surge of energy,
and the doors sprang open.
   Returning from the medical wing, the Brigadier heard
the rattle of gunfire. Drawing his revolver he set off at a
run. He ran straight into the fleeing sentry, and grabbed
him by the shoulders. `Pull yourself together, man. What
happened?'
   The sentry pointed a shaking hand behind him. `Killed
my mate, sir. It just went in there... inside the Reactor!'
   The Brigadier let the man go and sprinted for the
Reactor. He saw the steel doors hanging open and peered
cautiously inside. At the end of a concrete-lined corridor
the Axon monster crouched by a heavy, lead-shielded door.
The Brigadier was just in time to see the door fly open,
there was a glare of light... and the Axon disappeared.
Shaking his head in disbelief, the Brigadier turned and ran
back to the administration buildings.
   As he arrived outside the main block, a car drew up and
Sir George Hardiman stepped out. The Brigadier ran up to
him. `Sir George, come with me!'
   `What's happened? What's going on?'
   `I want you to check the Main Reactor.'
   `Then we'll have to go to the control room. What is
going on, Brigadier?'
   The Brigadier bustled the astonished Hardiman over to
the laboratory block and into the control room. `I'm sorry,
sir, this really is urgent.'
   `Oh, very well!' Watched by a puzzled technician
Hardiman began checking the maze of dials and meters
that lined the walls of the reactor control room. Suddenly
he broke off, peering through the picture window. `I say,
why is there a police box in Winser's laboratory?'
   `Part of the Doctor's equipment. The Reactor, Sir
George!'
   Hardiman completed his check. `Everything seems
pretty much in order. The readings are slightly up. Now,
what is this all about?'
   `Our Axon friend has just walked straight into the
furnace of the Main Reactor.'
   Hardiman looked at the Brigadier as if he was mad.
Inside the TARDIS, the Master straightened up with a
groan. `Hopeless! Over-weight... underpowered... museum
piece!' He pulled a lever and the TARDIS console vibrated
alarmingly. Hurriedly the Master switched it off. `Might as
well try to fly a second-hand gas stove!'
   He turned on the scanner. Rather to his surprise it
actually worked. The Master scanned round the laboratory,
zooming in on a close-up of the Particle Accelerator. `Now
that is interesting. If I cannibalise some of the parts...'
   The Master had never had the slightest hesitation in
helping himself to other people's property. He collected
tools from the Doctor's locker and opened the TARDIS
door.
Hardiman said obstinately, `If the Axon did go into the
Main Reactor, then he's simply committed suicide. No
living being could survive the energies...'
   Captain Yates had come into the control room.
Suddenly he called. `Look, sir! In the laboratory.' A black-
clad figure was calmly dismantling the Particle
Accelerator. `It's the Master, sir!'
   The Brigadier drew his revolver. `So it is. And this
time--we've got him!'
                         9
                    The Sacrifice
Absorbed in trying to dismantle the laser-trigger from the
light accelerator, the Master was unaware of the Brigadier
and Yates creeping down the iron stair-case and across the
laboratory towards him.
    Hardiman appeared at the top of the staircase, yelling,
`Brigadier! There's a massive power surge in the Main
Reactor!'
    Alerted, the Master spun round, only to find the
Brigadier covering him with his revolver. He made a dive
for the TARDIS, but Yates blocked his way. The Master
snatched out his laser gun. `Drop that thing or I'll blow
your head off!' The Brigadier levelled his revolver.
    The Master considered the odds then shrugged. As
always, he preferred to live and fight another day. He
tossed the laser gun to the floor and the Brigadier picked it
up. `Now then--what are you doing here? What are you
after?'
    The Master nodded towards the TARDIS. `That--
unfortunately.'
    `You wanted to steal the TARDIS?'
    The Master shrugged. `My own is in the hands of Axos.
I needed a vehicle with which to leave this planet--before
it's too late.'
    `But why bring it here?'
    `That was the Doctor's idea. By the way, I'd hoped for
the pleasure of meeting him... just once more. Where is
he?'
    `In the hands of the Axons, like your TARDIS.'
    Hardiman calve running down the ladder, near-panic in
his voice. `Brigadier, don't you realise? There's an
uncontrollable power build-up in the Main Reactor, it
could go critical at any moment. The whole place will blow
up.'
    `What's happened?' Such was the authority in the
Master's voice that the Brigadier told him. The Master
nodded. `I'm afraid the Axons have taken over your
Reactor. They're stealing its energy for some purpose of
their own.'
    Hardiman was on the verge of panic. `They don't
understand the dangers involved. They'll kill us all if it
overloads.'
    The Brigadier looked at the Master. `You! You know
these creatures. Is there anything we can do to stop them?
It's your life too, remember.'
    `I'm afraid there's nothing you can do. There might be
something I can do... in exchange for my freedom.' The
Master glanced meaningly at the Brigadier's revolver.
    `That's quite impossible.'
    The Master sighed regretfully. `Then in that case...' He
leaned back against the wall, folding his arms. `We'll all go
up together!'
    Urgently Hardiman whispered, `Brigadier, if this place
goes up it will cost untold numbers of lives. All it needs is a
chain reaction and this whole complex will become an
enormous nuclear bomb.'
    The Master gave a judicious nod. `I'm afraid he's right,
Brigadier.'
    Hardiman grabbed the Brigadier's arm. `For heaven's
sake--if there's a chance this man can help give him
whatever he wants.'
    The Brigadier looked agonised at the thought of losing
his prisoner so soon. But there was really no choice. `Very
well.'
    `My absolute and unconditional freedom?' insisted the
Master.
    `Yes! Now get moving!' Reluctantly the Brigadier
holstered his revolver.
    The Master turned to Hardiman. `Listen carefully, I
want a power-link from the Main Reactor into the
TARDIS.'
   Hardiman was boggled. `How will that help?'
   `I shall store up the power, then boost it through the
Accelerator and back to Axos. Instead of a gradual build-up
the Axons will get it all in one devastating surge.'
   `Is there anything else we can do?'
   `Oh, you might try the usual nuclear blast precautions--
sticky tape on the windows, that sort of thing...'
   The Master opened the TARDIS door, just as Filer ran
into the lab. Bill Filer's arms instructor would have been
proud of him. When he saw the Master, he made the fastest
draw of his life. As if by magic, the Colt Cobra was in Filer'
hand and jammed behind the Master's ear. `O.K., brother,
hold it right there.'
   The Master sighed wearily. `Really, Brigadier, do you
want my help or don't you? I really can't concentrate with
these constant interruptions.'
   Regretfully the Brigadier said, `Put the gun away, Filer.'
   `But this guy's the Master. Don't you realise'
   `I know. For the moment we happen to need his help.'
   `He's helping you? Are you crazy, Brigadier?'
   `Very probably, Mr Filer. But we don't seem to have any
choice.'
   `But...' Filer couldn't believe that his prey was going to
slip through his fingers yet again.
   `No buts,' said the Brigadier firmly. `Put the gun away,
Mr Filer.' Numbly Filer obeyed.
   `Thank you,' said the Master acidly. `Now perhaps I can
get to work.'
   Once again, he started to enter the TARDIS. Hardiman
was making for the control room. `I'll set up the link at
once.' He paused, looking back at the Master. `Where will
you be?'
   The Master opened the TARDIS door. `In here.'
   Hardiman was baffled. `In there? Why?'
   `Because theoretically this contraption should be able to
store the energy generated around it. Think of it as a giant
battery!'
   For the first time Hardiman seemed to take in the
Master's plan. `Are you trying to tell me you can store the
entire output of my Main Reactor in a police box?'
   `Oh yes,' said the Master gently. `At least, I hope so. It'll
be just too bad for all of us if I'm wrong.' He disappeared
inside the TARDIS and closed the door.
In the Brain area of Axos there was frantic activity. The
whole of Axos hummed with energy. The Doctor looked
on in an agony of remorse. He had given the Axons the
Time travel equations in the certainty that they would
never be able to use them. But he'd underestimated them.
Somehow they were getting the power they needed.
   He watched intently as the power-equations flashed
across the screen. The Voice of Axos whispered, `Forty per
cent Time Field capability. Forty-five per cent...' Then,
`Sixty per cent... Fifty per cent...' The Voice changed.
`Emergency, emergency!'
   The Doctor looked hopefully at Jo. `Something's going
wrong. They're not getting the power through!'
   The Voice of Axos began issuing a rapid stream of
orders. `Locate power failure source. Investigate possible
cell damage. Evaluate, trace and restore all energy
absorption channels. Emergency, Emergency...'
   Suddenly the Doctor realised that the tendrils holding
him were beginning to slacken their grip. So totally was
Axos involved in the crisis that even the tiny amount of
power needed to hold its prisoners was leaking away.
Slowly he edged free, gesturing to Jo to do the same. Once
they were clear of the tendrils he grabbed Jo's hand and
they set off at a run.
   Luckily for them, the Brain of Axos could spare them
only a little of its attention. `Attention, Time Lord and
companion escaping. Close all exit tracts. Surround,
neutralise and retrieve once emergency is over!'
   The Doctor and Jo fled through the glowing corridors,
somehow managing to elude the tendrils that lashed out to
catch them. Axos was confused and distracted. While that
distraction lasted, there was a chance, just a chance, that
they might win free.
A powerful throb of energy was shaking the laboratory.
Massive cables ran from the Reactor into the TARDIS.
Hardiman stood by the control console, monitoring the
enormous flow of power. Somehow the Master's
extraordinary set-up was working. The Main Reactor's
output was flowing not to Axos but into the TARDIS.
Helplessly the Brigadier looked on. Hardiman looked up at
him, raising his voice above the deep throbbing hum. `It
can't take much more, Brigadier. It can't!'
   Inside the TARDIS, the Master presided over the
rocking, throbbing TARDIS control-console like the
captain of a ship in a typhoon. He could see the Brigadier
and Hardiman on the scanner. Hardiman was saying, `I
daren't feed in much more. I don't want to risk the cables
burning out!'
   `The Master switched on the TARDIS loudspeaker
system and yelled, `Risk the cables, man! Risk everything!
We've got to!' As his fingers flashed over the TARDIS
console, the Master was actually smiling. He liked a good
crisis. In his own peculiar way, he was enjoying himself.
Jo and the Doctor found their progress slower. More and
more tendrils reached out for them, and the walls seemed
to be closing in. Suddenly the narrow space through which
they were squeezing turned into a dead end. Tentacles
wound round them, holding them trapped. They were
prisoners once more.
The Master was outside the TARDIS now, working on the
connections to the Particle Accelerator. He finished
making adjustments to the main power lever and looked at
his worried audience--Yates, Hardiman and the Brigadier.
`I've adapted the power lever so that it will free the vast
surge of energy now stored inside the TARDIS. When that
energy is released it will surge back to Axos in one
enormous boost!'
    Hardiman asked, `And what will that do to Axos?'
    `Cripple it, I hope. Perhaps even kill it. Let's see, shall
we?'
    The Master's hand stretched out for the power-lever.
Suddenly the Brigadier knocked it away. `Just one
moment. We have reason to believe that the Doctor and
Miss Grant are prisoners inside Axos. What will happen to
them?'
    The Master smiled. `I was wondering when that would
occur to you, Brigadier. There is one slight disadvantage to
my plan. When the power-surge hits Axos, the Doctor and
Miss Grant will die. They won't stand a chance.'
    In a horrified voice the Brigadier said, `No, I won't let
you do it.'
    The Master sounded calm, almost amused. Clearly he
was enjoying the situation. `The choice is yours--but
remember... unless we deal with this crisis, the whole
complex will explode. And that's just part of it. Unless we
destroy Axos, Brigadier--Axos will destroy the world!'
    The Brigadier stood very still. Once again, there was no
choice. How could he set the lives of two people against the
life of the world? He stepped away from the console.
    The Master reached out and pulled the lever.
                          10
                      Brainstorm
Axos convulsed.
    The massive, unexpected surge of energy almost
crippled it, almost killed it. But not quite. Summoning all
its resources Axos began to fight back..
    In the middle of the energy storm that lashed through
Axos, Jo and the Doctor found themselves free again. The
Doctor grabbed Jo's hand and dragged her through the
chaos. All around them Axos seethed and pulsed. Even the
surface beneath them rolled in waves of movement. A
kaleidoscope of flashing lights spun before them, and a
mad, high-pitched screaming filled their ears. Jo sobbed,
`Doctor, I can't take any more.'
    Ruthlessly, the Doctor urged her on. `Keep going, Jo,
we'll die if we stop.'
    Jo collapsed, her hands over her face. She began sobbing
hysterically. The Doctor heaved her to her feet and shook
her roughly. `Stop it, Jo. We must keep going.'
    She shook her head to clear it. `What's that screaming
noise?'
    `Axos,' said the Doctor simply. `The whole creature's
electro-convulsing. The power's creating an electric storm
in the brain. We're going straight through the centre of the
trauma. Look here! `
    Their flight had taken them back into the Brain area,
the heart of the power-storm. The agonising pain of Axos
showed itself as patterns of liquid light, flowing across the
walls. The Eye lashed to and fro on its stalk, totally
uncontrolled. Jo felt the pain and the near-madness of
Axos reaching into her mind, overwhelming her... She
staggered, clutching her head.
    `Fight it, Jo,' shouted the Doctor. `Don't let it get a grip
on your mind. Listen to me... Three sevens... What's three
sevens? Tell me!'
   All the time he was pulling her onwards.
   Jo found that concentration on the absurdly simple sum
did help to withstand the barrage of sound and light
stimuli all around her. `Twenty-one...' she muttered.
`Three sevens are twenty-one...'
   They fought their way across the Brain area and into an
outer chamber. Here too everything was a chaotic turmoil
of light and sound. Jo reeled back...
   `Times four,' called the Doctor. `Now multiply by four.'
   Jo grappled with the problem, her eyes tight shut
against those terrible anguished patterns of light. It was
harder this time `... Eighty... eighty-four' she gasped
triumphantly.
   `Well done--now--divide by six! `
   So they struggled on, the Doctor firing off sums, Jo
forcing herself to answer them. At last they reached an
opening on the far side of the chamber. The Doctor helped
Jo through it, and they started down the long tunnel
beyond.
   He paused as they came to a fork. `I think there's a way
out down here...'
   They ran along the tunnel, which seemed to sway to and
fro as they moved along. A shapeless figure appeared,
lurching towards them. Jo cowered back against the wall. It
was an Axon, part golden humanoid, part tentacled
monster. It reeled almost blindly ahead, lashing feebly at
them. The Doctor ducked, and gave it a hearty shove. The
already decomposing Axon slammed into the wall, then
slid to the floor, dissolving into a shapeless puddle of
Axonite. Jo covered her eyes...
   The Doctor took her hand and led her past. `Come on,
Jo. We're nearly there now.'
   They reached a wider passage. At the end of it they
recognised the arched door that led to freedom. The door
was steadily shrinking as though it was trying to close
itself, but couldn't quite summon up the energy.
   `Quick,' shouted the Doctor. `It's closing up!'
   Desperate to escape, Jo ran for the door and shot
through the fast-shrinking opening in a flying leap. The
Doctor was close behind her. As they hurtled through the
gap, it closed convulsively behind them, in a last-minute
attempt to prevent their escape. But too late. They were
free! Picking themselves up they ran towards the Nuton
Complex.
   Meanwhile, Axos was fighting back. The sudden
unexpected surge of power was slowly being absorbed,
controlled. The panic began to subside, the Brain began
functioning once more.
   Weakly the Voice of Axos whispered. `Source of attack
identified. Power-surge is being channelled through
Particle Accelerator. Concentrate power-reversal on this
sector. Total destruction essential--repeat--essential!'
The Master stepped out of the TARDIS and looked round
the silent laboratory. `Well, gentlemen? Your
congratulations would be in order, I think?'
     The Brigadier, Captain Yates and Bill Filer looked
grimly back at him. No one spoke.
     `I see. How very ungracious. Well, if you'll forgive me I
have a few minor repairs to complete.' The Master turned
to re-enter the TARDIS.
     The Brigadier stepped forward. `Wait!'
     `Why? You agreed to my freedom, and now I've earned
it.'
     `We don't know that yet. Until we're sure what's
happened..
     `Really, Brigadier, I promised to help you solve this
crisis. I can't solve all your problems for you.'
     The Brigadier was unmoved. `Captain Yates!'
     Yates's revolver was already covering the Master.
     Hardiman appeared at the top of the steps. `Something's
going wrong, Brigadier. They've absorbed the power, and
now they're feeding it back to us!' He ran to the control
room and flicked the switch of a public-address system.
`This is Sir George Hardiman. All personnel, your
attention, please. Evacuate Accelerator sector. Shut off all
power and proceed to blast-wall shelters. That is all.'
   He ran back to the laboratory. The Particle Accelerator
started throbbing with power once more, and the cable-
connections were beginning to smoke. The power-throb
rose higher and higher...
   Hardiman took command. `Into the main control room,
everybody!'
   The Brigadier watched him go to a locker and put on
protective goggles and heavy gloves. `What are you going
to do?
   `Disconnect those cables. Now, the control room, please,
Brigadier.'
   The Brigadier looked at the rapidly-vibrating Particle
Accelerator. The cables were pouring out smoke now and it
was clearly dangerous even to touch them. `Let me help
you.'
   `No, Brigadier, this is my responsibility. I'm a scientist
or I used to be. I'll join you as soon as I've finished.'
   `Very well.' The Brigadier waved to Yates and Filer,
who herded the Master up the stairs at gun-point. The
Brigadier followed, turning at the top of the stairs. `Good
luck, Sir George.' Hardiman didn't hear him. Gloves and
goggles looking incongruous with his immaculate suit, he
was bending over the shuddering console, a pair of
insulated pliers in his hands. The Brigadier ran to the
control room and joined the others.
   They watched through the picture window as Hardiman
worked steadily at his task, seemingly unaffected by the
din all round him. The power-hum had risen to a roar that
was shaking the whole building. Tensely the Brigadier
asked, `How's he doing?'
   `Surprisingly well,' answered the Master. `He'll have to
take the trigger section out before he can disconnect the
main cable. It's a tricky job...'
   `How much time has he got?'
   `Who knows, Brigadier? Who knows?'
   Hardiman pushed up the goggles to wipe the sweat from
his eyes, replaced them and went on with his task. It was a
very long time since he'd last had tools in his hands, but he
worked calmly and steadily, with a curious feeling of
contentment. Despite all the years in meetings and
conferences, he could still do a real job when he had to...
Like a man defusing a bomb, he unscrewed the last bolt
and lifted the trigger-section free. Gently he lowered it to
the floor.
   The Brigadier shouted, `He's done it!'
   `Almost,' said the Master softly. `Almost--but not quite.
There's still the main power cable...'
   The cable was very hot now, and Hardiman's gloves
were starting to smoulder. Carefully he unbolted the
shackles and tugged. The cable refused to come free--the
shackles had been warped by the heat. He tugged again...
and again. He gave a final heave. There was a sudden
explosion that hurled him clear across the room--but the
main power cable was free, the end clutched in his gloved
hand. The roaring stopped, leaving a silence that hurt the
ears.
   The spectators in the control room rushed down into
the laboratory. Yates ran across to Hardiman and knelt
beside the body. `He's dead, sir. The shock must have
killed him instantly.'
   The Brigadier nodded silently. Filer yelled, `Look out!'
The Master, who had been last to leave the control room,
was running for the TARDIS.
   Filer ran to tackle him, but the Master smashed him to
one side. But by now Yates and the Brigadier were
blocking the way to the TARDIS. The Master changed
direction, and ran for the door. He almost made it--then
an out-thrust foot brought him crashing down. He looked
up. In the doorway stood a tall figure, grimy and rumpled,
but still with a certain elegance. `Dear me!' said the
Doctor. `Leaving so soon?'
The Brigadier commandeered Hardiman's office for a
combined meal and conference. The Doctor, Yates, Filer,
Jo Grant and, of course, Chinn, sat round a big conference
table tucking into much needed coffee and sandwiches.
The Master, handcuffed, was an un-willing spectator. Also
present was Ericson, a balding unobtrusive man who'd
been Hardiman's assistant, and was now considerably
alarmed to find himself in full charge.
   The Doctor, happily munching a chicken sandwich,
offered one to the Master, who snarlingly refused.
`Temper!' said the Doctor reprovingly, and took a swig of
coffee. `Now then, Brigadier, you've sent out those
warnings about Axonite?'
   `I've sent them out--whether any one will believe them
is another matter. There's a tendency to regard them as a
trick to regain control of Axonite.'
   The Doctor nodded. `Very understandable, considering
the earlier behaviour of friend Chinn.'
   Chinn glowered into his coffee cup, but said nothing. So
much had gone so drastically wrong, that he was laying
very low till the situation cleared. If there was any credit
going, he could always grab it later.
   The Doctor put down his cup. `Well, that aside, we've
enough to worry about with the main body of Axos--here.'
He gestured through the window in the direction of the
mound. `Axos is like a vulture, gentlemen,' said the Doctor
dramatically. `Its claws are already sunk deep into your
planet and it has no intention of letting go. Soon it will
activate the Nutrition Cycle--and the feast will begin!'
   Whatever that meant, Filer didn't like the sound of it.
`How's that again, Doc?'
   `The Axonite will cease to be dormant. It will begin to
feed, and continue till every scrap of energy, every living
thing has been consumed.'
   Ever-practical, the Brigadier asked, `Well? How do we
stop it?' He seemed quite confident that the Doctor would
have an answer.
   `I'm not sure that we can.'
   Jo was horrified. `There must be something you can do,
Doctor?'
   `I can try.' He turned to Ericson. `Can you commandeer
the computer banks for me? I'll need to make some very
complex calculations.'
   Ericson nodded. `Yes, of course, Doctor. I'll clear them
right away.'
   `Good, that's a start. Now then, Brigadier, I want you to
keep constant watch on Axos. We must know its every
move.'
   The Brigadier looked across the table. `Captain Yates,
will you see to that?'
   `Right away, sir. There's remote-control camera
equipment in the Mobile H.Q. We could use that.'
   `Off you go then. I'll be setting up my H.Q. in the lab. I
want you in R/T contact all the time.'
   The Doctor stood up. `Then that's it for the moment.
Oh, just one more thing--I'm afraid I'll need him.' He
pointed to the Master.
   Immediately Filer protested, `Now just a minute, Doc...'
   `I'm sorry, Bill. You'll have to hand him over. The only
way I can defeat Axos is by using the TARDIS. To do that
I must have the Master's help. He has certain knowledge
that is no longer available to me.' The Doctor smiled.
`Anyway, he's quite a competent mechanic. He may as well
earn his keep! `
   The Master shot him a murderous glance, but said
nothing. Reluctantly, Filer unlocked the Master's
handcuffs. Jo leaned closer to the Doctor. `How can you
possibly trust him?' she whispered. `You know he'll kill
you first chance he gets.'
   The Doctor gave her a reassuring pat on the head.
`Don't worry, Jo. The Brigadier's given me this.' He
produced the Master's laser gun. `That'll keep him in
order.'
   But Jo wasn't reassured. The Doctor was quite unused
to carrying weapons, let alone using them. She couldn't
help feeling that his nature was no match for the Master's
evil cunning. Like Filer, she was very worried as she
watched the Master follow the Doctor from the room.
Loaded down with camera equipment, Captain Yates and
Sergeant Benton struggled to the top of a low wooded rise
and peered over the edge. Benton said, `Right on target.'
There below them was the low mound which was all that
could be seen of Axos. `It doesn't seem to be doing
anything, sir. Just sitting there.'
   `Let's hope it goes on doing just that, Sergeant,'
whispered Yates. `Well, on with the show. Our viewers are
waiting!' They set up the camera at a convenient vantage
point, camouflaging it as best they could with rocks and
branches. Then they moved carefully back down the ridge,
laying cable behind them, until they reached their Land
Rover which was hidden in a clump of bushes.
   Quickly Benton connected up the cable to the one in the
Land Rover. Yates meanwhile was on the R/T. `Trap One
to Greyhound over...'
   They heard the Brigadier's voice. `Receiving you loud
and clear, Trap One. Over.'
   Yates glanced at Benton who nodded. `All fixed up, sir.'
   Yates spoke into the R/T. `Eyes down, look in!'
   The Brigadier's voice crackled back. `Never mind the
comedy, Captain Yates. Are you ready or aren't you?'
   `Sorry, sir. You should be getting a picture now...'
   The Brigadier was watching a small monitor screen in
the main control room. On it appeared a clear picture of
Axos--doing, as Benton had just observed, precisely
nothing. `Affirmative, Trap One. Maintain surveillance.'
   The Brigadier put down the R/T set as Chinn bustled
into the control room, a chicken sandwich still clutched in
his hand. `Brigadier, I demand full access to the
communications equipment. Unless I'm allowed to send
reports to the Minister, to the country, Britain will get the
blame for all this.'
   `You mean you'll get the blame,' said the Brigadier
unpleasantly. `And quite right too, Mr Chinn.'
   `If you don't allow me access to the Ministry...'
   The Brigadier lost patience. `We are in the middle of a
major crisis, Mr Chinn, and I have more to worry about
than your desire to whitewash yourself. Now, stay out of
my way or I'll have you put under arrest.'
   Chinn lapsed into an offended silence, wandering over
to the picture window. In the laboratory below, the Doctor
and the Master were busy dismantling the Particle
Accelerator. Perched on laboratory stools, Jo and Filer
were chatting quietly.
Jo couldn't help smiling at Filer's gloomy face. `Cheer up,
Bill! You look like a disappointed bloodhound.'
   `All bloodhounds look disappointed. It's an
occupational disease.'
   `Why so gloomy? You've got your man! `
   `Have I? I don't like it, Jo.'
   `Nor do I. But all we can do is wait.'
   Filer shook his head. `I don't mean the hanging
around--I'm used to that. Or even the Axos business. That
seems to be out of our hands...'
   `Then what is worrying you?'
   `They are.' He nodded across the laboratory. `Look at
`em! Thick as thieves.'
   The Master and the Doctor stood by the Particle
Accelerator, talking in low voices as they worked. Filer
muttered, `I've got a feeling there's something going on.
Something we're not supposed to know about.'
   Jo said, loyally. `Don't be silly, Bill. The Doctor's using
the Master because he needs his help, that's all.'
   Inwardly she wasn't so positive. She remembered her
own early suspicions when the Doctor had taken such a
sudden interest in Winser's work. And why had the Doctor
wanted the TARDIS brought down to Nuton? She knew
how bitterly he resented his exile to Earth. Any chance of
escape would present a tremendous temptation. Was the
Doctor ready to buy his freedom at any price? Even if it
meant making a deal with the Master? The dismantling
process completed, the Doctor and the Master carried a
pile of electronic parts into the TARDIS, closing the door
behind them. Filer looked at Jo. Her face was as worried as
his own.
The Doctor unloaded his collection of electronic oddments
onto the console and started sorting through them. `The
Master watched sardonically. `I'm still waiting to hear this
brilliant scheme of yours, Doctor.'
   The Doctor looked mildly surprised. `Don't tell me you
fell for that too? There isn't one. There's no way of
stopping Axos now. Things have gone too far.'
   `Indeed? Then may I ask what we're doing here?'
   `Isn't it obvious? If you can help me to get my TARDIS
going, we can both escape.'
   `Doctor! Are you actually suggesting an alliance?'
   The Doctor whirled round. `Why not?' he demanded
with sudden passion. `Do you really think I intend to end
my days as a heap of dust--on the second rate planet of a
third rate star?'
   `What? You mean you're prepared to leave your
precious Earth to the tender mercies of Axos?'
   `Certainly. You know why I'm on Earth. My fellow Time
Lords exiled me here.'
   The Master stroked his beard thoughtfully. `I see. But
why should I help you?'
   `Well--we are both Time Lords.'
   `And mortal enemies, as you very well know! I'll need a
better reason than that, Doctor.'
   `Very well.' The Doctor's voice hardened. `If you don't
help me, I'll hand you back to UNIT. You'll be a prisoner
on a doomed planet.'
   `And you'll be doomed with me!'
   The Doctor nodded. `I'm very well aware of it. We
escape together--or we die together!'
   The Master was still unconvinced. `Why so generous,
Doctor? Why not hand me over to UNIT and escape
yourself?'
   The Doctor looked shamefaced. `I can't. The Time
Lords have put a block on my knowledge of
Dematerialisation Theory.'
   `Ah, I see. How very unfortunate.'
   `Well,' said the Doctor. `Make up your mind. Time's
running out you know--for both of us. Death--or
freedom? Which is it to be?'
                       11
                The Feast of Axos
The Master looked thoughtfully at the Doctor. Was he
really capable of such ruthless realism? But the logic of the
Doctor's arguments was unanswerable. It pleased the
Master to think that even the Doctor was ultimately
selfish. `Very well, Doctor. I accept.'
    `Good. Well now, you're the mechanic. How do we get
the TARDIS going again? What's the answer?'
    The Master held up a complicated section of machinery.
`The answer, Doctor, is here--the trigger mechanism from
the Particle Accelerator. It has the potential to supply the
deficient elements of your dematerialisation circuit. With a
little ingenuity I may be able to combine one with the
other to produce a functioning whole. But it will take
time.'
    `Not too much time. I hope,' snapped the Doctor.
`Right, you get on with the repairs. I'll look after the
Space/Time Co-ordinates. I've already fed the equations
into the computer.'
    `Once you'd have worked them out in your head,
Doctor,' mocked the Master.
    `Once I didn't need your help for anything,' said the
Doctor bitterly. `But times change.' He started to leave the
TARDIS, returned and removed a component from the
console. `In case you finish before I get back. You might be
tempted to leave without me!'
    The Doctor left the TARDIS, slamming the door
behind him. The Master chuckled, and started work.
Inside Axos, all was calmness and order once more. The
attempt to conquer Time travel had been abandoned. Axos
was going about its normal business--the total absorption
of all life and energy from a living planet. The Voice
whispered, `Data indicates distribution now complete.
Activate Nutrition Cycle.'
All over the world, scientists watched in horror as the
Axonite they were studying began to grow... soon it was
smashing its way out of their laboratories and destroying
all in its path. Now people remembered the warnings sent
out by UNIT. But it was too late. The Axonite was on the
move...
`It's surfacing, sir. The whole thing's just... coming up out
of the ground!'
    As Yates's voice crackled over the R/T Chinn, the
Doctor and the Brigadier watched the scene on the
monitor in fascinated horror. Like a gigantic jelly-fish, the
heaving, quivering bulk of Axos was rising out of the
ground. The mound had become an enormous hill, and it
was still growing. Soon it would be as big as a mountain,
big enough to engulf the whole Nuton Complex.
    The Brigadier grabbed the R/T. `Yates, Benton, pull out
at once. Back to the Complex on the double.'
    Yates's voice was more than a little shaky. `With the
greatest of pleasure, sir. Trap One out.'
    The Brigadier put down the receiver. `Well, Doctor,
what happens now?'
    The Doctor studied the swelling horror on the screen.
`Axos will begin feeding. First on direct energy sources,
like this Complex, then on anything in its path. It will
grow even more, and become more mobile. It will probably
send out smaller units to protect itself...'
    The R/T crackled into life again. The Brigadier picked
it up, and listened to the frantic voice on the other end.
Then he said curtly, `We're doing all we can. I'll keep you
informed.' He flicked a switch and the set went silent.
`That was UNIT H.Q., Doctor. This stuff's on the rampage
all over the world.'
    Chinn was shaking with fright. `Where will it end,
Doctor? When will that thing leave us alone?'
    `When there's nothing left for it to feed on, Mr Chinn.
By that time unfortunately the surface of the Earth will be
like the surface of the moon--dead!'
Sergeant Benton and Captain Yates sprinted for their Land
Rover, trying not to look at the ever-growing bulk of Axos
dominating the skyline behind them. Yates jumped into
the driving scat, Benton climbed into the back. `What
about the equipment, sir?'
   `Just cast off the cables. We'll have to abandon it all.'
Benton obeyed, and Yates started the engine. `Hold tight,'
he yelled and jolted through the trees at top speed. They
swerved out onto the road that led back to the Nuton
Complex.
   A line of waving-tentacled Axon monsters barred their
path. Benton grabbed a Sten and sprayed bullets into the
heaving mass. Yates slammed his foot down hard and the
Land Rover ploughed straight through the Axons, sending
them flying in all directions.
   The Land Rover sped on. Benton yelled, `Think we've
lost `em, sir?'
   Yates shook his head. `They'll probably try again. Get
those grenades ready just in case.'
   There was a crackle of energy from the woods beside the
road and an enormous tree toppled straight across their
path. The Land Rover screeched to a halt. Benton looked
behind them. The pursuing Axons were coming up fast.
He lobbed a grenade, and blew the nearest into twitching
fragments. But more Axons were emerging from the
woods...
   Yates swung the Land Rover in a tight curve and drove
back the way they'd come, while Benton flung grenades to
clear their path. Some of the trees were on fire now, and
smoke drifted across the road. A circle of Axons was
closing in on the car.
   Yates put his foot down again and drove straight into
the ring of Axons, smashing a way through yet again.
   As they sped down the road Benton yelled, `I think
we've made it. sir. We're through!' A tentacle groped down
from above--one of the Axon monsters was sprawled on
the canvas hood.
   Yates shouted, `Time to abandon ship! Jump!'
Deliberately he swung the Land Rover into a ditch. Yates
and Benton leaped from their seats just before the vehicle
struck. They landed beside the road, rolling over and over
to break their fall. They picked themselves up and looked
back. The Land Rover had turned over and the Axon was
trapped beneath it, tentacles thrashing frantically.
   Benton ran forward a few paces and lobbed his last
grenade with deadly accuracy. The grenade rolled inside
the wrecked Land Rover, exploding seconds later. There
was a crump and the Land Rover went up in a roar of
flame.
   Yates drew a gasping breath. `Don't know what the
Brig'll say about that, Sergeant Benton! `
   Benton grinned. `Me neither, sir. But at least we got one
of them! What do we do now, sir?'
   `We try to make it back to the Brigadier--on foot!'
Jo came into the laboratory, a long strip of computer print-
out in her hand. She was studying the figures in
puzzlement when the Doctor emerged from the TARDIS
and took them from her. `Ah, thank you, Jo. Just what I
was waiting for!'
   `Those figures, Doctor...'
   `Yes, Jo?' The Doctor paused in the TARDIS doorway.
Was she wrong or was there something furtive in his
manner?
   `What are they, exactly?'
   `Oh, just a few course co-ordinates,' said the Doctor
vaguely.
   Filer came to join them. `Why course co-ordinates? Not
going anywhere--are you, Doc?'
   The Master appeared in the doorway of the TARDIS.
Quickly the Doctor passed him the figures, saying,
`Everything ready?'
   `As a matter of fact, it is.' The Master looked curiously
at the Doctor, wondering how he would react now that the
moment of decision had finally come. The Doctor
hesitated.
   Deliberately the Master raised his voice. `Time we were
on our way, Doctor!' Just as he'd hoped, the words
provoked a crisis. Filer snatched out his gun.
   `Not if I can help it!' he yelled.
   But the Master's laser gun was already in the Doctor's
hand. Before Filer could level his gun, the Doctor had him
covered. `Drop it please, Mr Filer.' Filer obeyed and the
Doctor kicked the gun out of reach.
   Heart-brokenly Jo said, `Oh, Doctor...'
   The Doctor looked away, as the Brigadier came
clattering down the ladder. `Doctor, we're being attacked!
Main gate says the Axons are swarming everywhere...'
   `Ah, there you are, Brigadier. Just in time to say
goodbye!'
   `But, Doctor, you can't...' cried Jo.
   `I'm afraid we must, Jo.'
   `We?'
   The Doctor gestured towards the Master. `After all, we
are both Time Lords. Goodbye, Jo. Goodbye, Brigadier.'
He stepped inside the TARDIS.
   The Master was already busy at the console. `Neatly
done, Doctor. You know, I never really thought you'd go
through with it.'
   `If we're going, let's go,' snapped the Doctor. `If we can
go, that is.'
   The Master smiled. His hands flew over the console.
Slowly and uncertainly at first, the central column of the
TARDIS began its rise and fall.
   From outside the laboratory came the rattle of gun-fire,
and the thud of grenades. There were shouted orders,
dying screams. The sounds became louder. The battle was
moving closer...
   Jo pounded on the TARDIS door, tears streaming down
her face. `You can't go, Doctor. You can't... We need you...'
The blue light on top of the police box began flashing
steadily and a wheezing, groaning sound filled the air.
   A weary figure staggered into the laboratory, uniform
grimy, face black with smoke. It took Filer a moment or
two to recognise Captain Yates. Yates saluted hurriedly.
`The whole Complex is being over-run, sir. Those Axon
things chased us right back here.'
   Sergeant Benton followed him into the lab. `They're
right on top of us, sir. I've gathered a few of the lads.'
   The Brigadier took charge. `All right, Benton, get them
in here.'
   `Right, sir.' Benton dashed out to reappear seconds later
with a handful of UNIT troops.
   The Brigadier barked, `Close the doors and get those
blast-doors across.' Besides the everyday doors, the
laboratory had additional blast-doors of heavy reinforced
concrete. They were kept folded back, used only during
particularly dangerous experiments. The UNIT soldiers
worked hard heaving them into place.
   Suddenly Yates noticed the groaning, light-flashing
TARDIS.
   `What's happening, sir? Where's the Doctor off to?'
   `You can forget about the Doctor,' said the Brigadier
curtly. `He's no longer involved in our problems. Get the
men into cover, and watch those doors!'
   The TARDIS's groaning rose to a higher pitch, the light
flashed brighter. Jo found herself pounding on thin air.
The TARDIS had vanished. Filer led the sobbing Jo to
cover.
   They heard a rattle of gunfire from outside the
laboratory, and a chilling scream as some unlucky straggler
was destroyed by the Axons.
   There was a terrifying silence. With no real hope, but
with a determination not to give in, the Brigadier and the
rest of the besieged waited for the final battle.
The Doctor thrust the Master away from the TARDIS
console and began operating the controls. The Master tried
to drag him off, but suddenly the little laser gun was in the
Doctor's hand. `Just be sensible, old chap... I didn't tell you
all my plan, you know.'
    The Master saw the central column begin to slow down.
`You can't dematerialise here,' he screamed. `We've
scarcely moved--we're not even in Space/ Time!'
    `Nevertheless, this is as far as we're going--for the
moment.'
    `But where are we?'
    The Doctor grinned. `Don't worry. You'll recognise it
when you see it.' The central column stopped. `Here we are
then. Come on!'
    Reluctantly the Master stepped outside. The first thing
that met his eye was his own TARDIS. He turned to find
himself gazing into the single Eye. They were in the Brain
area--back inside Axos.
    The Master heard the familiar whispering voice. `Why
have you returned, Time Lords?' Tentacled Axon
monsters appeared to surround them.
    The Master shrugged. `You'd better ask my friend here.'
    `It's really very simple,' announced the Doctor. `I've
realised how invincible is the power of Axos. I'm prepared
to give you the power of Time travel on one condition.'
    `Well?'
    `That you take Axos to Gallifrey, the planet of the Time
Lords. I mean to take my revenge on those who exiled
me--by destroying their planet.'
    `If we agree--how can you keep your promise?'
    `All we have to do is link drive systems. The TARDIS
will become part of Axos. Axos itself will become a
TARDIS.'
    The Master looked at the Doctor in horror. Clearly the
fellow's exile had affected his brain. An attack on the Time
Lords themselves was beyond even the Master's audacity.
How the Doctor must hate those who had captured and
exiled him!
    The Master panicked. `This has nothing to do with me,'
he shouted. `My part is finished. All I ask is the return of
my TARDIS. I leave you to your new alliance, Doctor.'
   As he headed for the gleaming white dome the Doctor
shouted, `Stop him. I need his help for the setting-up of the
link.'
   A line of Axons barred the Master's way `Help him,'
ordered the Voice of Axos. `You may have your freedom
when the link is finished.' Slowly the Master followed the
Doctor back inside the TARDIS.
Crouching in what little cover they could find, the
Brigadier and his party stared at the concrete door. For
some time now they had heard the crackle of energy as the
Axons outside the laboratory sought a way in. Suddenly a
tiny glowing spot appeared in the centre of the concrete
door. It turned into a tiny hole. A hole which grew steadily
larger. Somehow the Axons had focussed their energy into
a kind of thermic lance...
   Yates said, `They'll soon be through, sir.'
   The Brigadier's voice was calm. `All right, everyone. Be
ready with the grenades.'
   When the hole was about a foot in diameter, it stopped
growing.
   Jo whispered to Filer. `What's happening, Bill? Why
have they stopped?'
   Chinn mopped his streaming brow. `Surely we ought to
try and negotiate a surrender?' No one listened to him.
   An arc of blazing light shot from the hole in the door to
the Particle Accelerator. Immediately the half-wrecked
machine started humming with power.
   The Brigadier moved across to Ericson. `What's
happening?'
   `They've managed to energise the Particle Accelerator.
Look at the readings!' There was terror in Ericson's voice.
   The Brigadier studied the dials on the control console--
every dial was creeping up to maximum. `Can't you shut it
off?' he shouted.
   `Not without the trigger mechanism. Your friend the
Doctor took that!'
    `So what'll happen?' The hum of power was rising to a
roar.
    `The particles will just go on accelerating and
accelerating until--bang! The whole place will go up!'
    Yates tugged at the Brigadier's arm, raising his voice
above the throb of power. `Look, sir. The door.'
    The hole had begun growing again. Many-tentacled
figures could be seen massing on the other side.
    The roar of the runaway Particle Accelerator rose higher
still...
                       12
                 Trapped in Time
The Master straightened up. `There--it's finished! Your
link's complete.'
    `Not quite!' Thrusting the Master aside, the Doctor
began adjusting controls at feverish speed, his hands
flickering over the console like some demented pianist.
    The Master watched him, a light of dawning
comprehension in his eyes. `Why are you changing the
settings? That's a Time loop! Doctor, don't switch on--
we'll be trapped too...'
    The Master tried to pull the Doctor away, but a hearty
shove sent him reeling out through the still-open door of
the TARDIS. Quickly the Doctor closed the doors. He
touched the controls and the materialisation noise began.
    Outside in the Brain area the Master yelled, `Stop him,
you fools! Don't you understand? He's committing suicide
and taking us with him. It's all a trick. He's doing this for
Earth, not you... He's putting you in a Time loop and
you'll stay there--forever!'
    Even if the Axons had been prepared to listen to him,
they were in no state to act. The sudden wrench through
Time had totally disorientated them. They staggered
wildly about the Brain area, tentacles flailing helplessly.
The Eye revolved furiously on its stalk. `Stop them! Stop
them!' screamed the Voice of Axos.
    The Master thrust his way through the Axons and
disappeared inside his TARDIS.
    The Doctor leaned over the TARDIS console like a man
setting a reluctant horse to a jump. `Come on, old girl.' he
muttered. `You can do it. Don't let me down now. We've
got to drag Axos into that Time loop!'
    He flicked more switches and a final surge of power
poured through the TARDIS...
   The concrete door crumbled away, and a flood of Axon
monsters poured into the laboratory. The UNIT troops
hurled their last grenades. The wave of Axons checked,
they surged forward again.
   Jo screamed as an Axon loomed over her. The Brigadier
emptied his revolver into another, and he flung the gun in
a last, useless gesture.
   Yates and Benton lashed out, using empty rifles like
clubs. Filer grabbed a lab stool and raised it above his
head.
   The Axons vanished.
   Axos vanished. The heaving mountainous mass
disappeared into thin air.
   All over the world, the rampaging masses of Axonite
vanished too.
In the Space/Time continuum Axos traced an unending
spiral course, whirling forever in an endless figure-eight.
Inside his TARDIS the Doctor readjusted controls once
more. `Come on, old girl. One final effort! We must break
free. You got them in the Time loop--now get me out!'
   From outside the TARDIS he could hear the Voice of
Axos. `Your sacrifice will not save you, Time Lord. You are
joined to us forever in the loop of Time. Your fate is ours!'
   `Come on,' urged the Doctor. `Come on!'
   The Eye of Axos glared in hopeless malignant rage as
the TARDIS dematerialised.
   And Axos continued its journey through Space/ Time--
a journey that would never end...
It took the dazed survivors only a moment to realise that
although the menace of the Axons was gone, the menace of
the roaring Particle Accelerator was still on top of them.
   `Outside, everybody,' yelled the Brigadier. `It'll go up
any minute!'
   Chinn led the dash to the door by several yards.
   They made it just in time. Even as they all got through
the door there came the first explosion. Its force caved in
most of the outer wall, and the entrance behind them was
blocked by falling rubble.
   Ericson grabbed the Brigadier's arm. `Come on,' he
shouted. `That was only the first one. There'll be a whole
series of them before it finally blows' ` They ran for shelter.
   In the laboratory, there was a wheezing, groaning noise.
Blue light flashing, the TARDIS materialised. The door
opened and the Doctor stepped out beaming. `Hullo,
everybody, I'm...' His smile faded as he took in the
desolation around him, the shuddering, roaring
Accelerator.
   There was an explosion and then another. Part of the
roof caved in and the TARDIS was showered with rubble.
`Dear me,' said the Doctor mildly, and ducked hurriedly
back inside.
   He ran to the console and quickly operated controls. For
a moment nothing happened. The TARDIS rocked with
the force of another, greater explosion. `Come on,' begged
the Doctor. `Take me somewhere--anywhere!'
   Slowly the central column began to move.
   As a final terrifying explosion destroyed the laboratory
forever, the TARDIS dematerialised yet again...
Ericson led them to the shelter of one of the specially
constructed blast-walls which surrounded the laboratory
area. Almost immediately they were thrown to the ground
by the final, shattering explosion. Ears ringing they looked
out from shelter. There was a smoking, rubble-filled crater
where once the laboratory had stood. Slowly they walked
towards it.
   Jo's face was white. `What about the Doctor? Suppose he
decided to come back after all and materialised inside the
lab?'
   The Brigadier shook his head. `Let's hope he didn't, Jo.
Nothing could have survived that.'
   As if to prove him wrong there came a familiar groaning
sound.     The      TARDIS      re-materialised,    balanced
precariously on top of the heap of rubble. The door opened
and the Doctor stepped out. Perched on a shattered beam,
he looked down at the astonished faces below him. `Well,
there's a fine welcome, I must say! `
Much, much later, back in Hardiman's office, the Doctor
was still trying to explain. `It's perfectly simple, Brigadier.
A Time loop is, well--it's a Time loop.' He made a
complicated figure-of-eight gesture with his hands. `You
pass continually through the same fixed points in
Space/Time.'
   `And that's what Axos is doing?'
   `That's right. For ever and ever. They wanted Time
travel--and now they've got it!`
   There was just one question occupying Filer. `What
about the Master?'
   `I sincerely hope he's trapped in Axos too.'
   `Hope?'
   The Doctor looked a little uneasy. `I can't be absolutely
sure,' he said defensively. `I was a little busy at the time!'
   Filer just looked at him.
   The Doctor cleared his throat. `I'm ninety per cent
certain, though.'
   `How much?'
   `Well, pretty certain. Fairly positive, really.' Faced with
Filer's unwinking stare the Doctor threw up his hands.
`Oh, I suppose it's possible he got away--just possible.'
   Filer heaved a deep, deep sigh.
   The Brigadier took up the questioning. `So how did you
get out of this--Time loop thingummy?'
   `I boosted the temporal circuits and broke free,' said the
Doctor impatiently. `Nearly blew up the TARDIS--but the
old girl made it in the end.'
   Now it was Jo's turn. `Never mind the scientific stuff,
Doctor. Why did you have us all think you'd made a deal
with the Master to do the dirty on us?'
   The Doctor put an arm round her shoulders. `I'm sorry
about all that, Jo--really! But I needed the Master's help--
and I knew he'd never give it unless he thought I was as
big a villain as he was! `
   `Why didn't you let us into the secret?'
   `I didn't dare. It was just because all your reactions were
genuine that the Master was finally convinced.'
   Jo smiled with relief. `So you wouldn't really have gone
off and left us in the lurch?'
   The Doctor looked rather uncomfortable. `To be
perfectly honest, Jo... Yes and no!'
   Jo was indignant. `And what does that mean?'
   `Well yes, I would have gone off--but no, I wouldn't
have left you in the lurch. I had a sort of double plan, you
see. First to dispose of Axos--which I did. Then to get
away from Earth in the TARDIS.'
   `Which you didn't,' said Jo. `Why not? A change of
heart?'
   The Doctor looked even more guilty. `I'm afraid not, Jo.
The Time Lords have programmed a return circuit into
the TARDIS. Even if I do get it going, it will just take me
back to Earth. I seem to be some kind of cosmic yo-yo,' he
concluded indignantly.
   Filer stood up. `Well, goodbye, everyone. The
disappointed bloodhound will now trail back to
Washington.' He shook his head ruefully. `And to think I
reckoned England would be dull.'
   After a round of handshakes, and a kiss on the cheek
from Jo, Filer went on his way.
   The Brigadier stood up too. `Well, we'd better be getting
back to UNIT H.Q. Make sure Chinn doesn't grab all the
credit.'
   Chinn was already safely back in Whitehall, explaining
to the Minister how his genius had solved the problem.
   The Doctor was looking out of the window, watching
Yates, Benton and a squad of UNIT troops trying to get the
TARDIS off its pile of rubble and onto a waiting lorry.
They were using a ricketty-looking improvised derrick,
made from ropes and wooden beams. The TARDIS gave a
sudden lurch, and the Doctor uttered an indignant yell.
`Hey, just you be careful with that--it's the only one I've
got!
    Cloak flying behind him, he dashed out of the room,
obviously determined to supervise operations himself.
    The Brigadier collected his hat, gloves and swagger-
stick. `Come along, Miss Grant. It looks as if we'll have the
Doctor with us for some time yet. Good job we've got you
to keep an eye on him!
    Jo smiled to herself. Maybe the Doctor would defeat the
Time Lords and get away from Earth--some day. She
couldn't help hoping that it wouldn't happen too soon.
    She crossed to the window. The Doctor had joined the
little group around the pile of rubble, together with
Sergeant Benton and Captain Yates. All three were arguing
furiously, waving their arms, disputing the next move in
rescuing the TARDIS. The Brigadier joined them, and the
arguments broke out afresh. Jo grinned, and went down
the stairs to join in. It was nice to see things back to
normal...
