Jo glanced up at the Doctor
`Things must be pretty serious then'.
`They are, Jo. Very serious indeed. The
whole of the Universe is in danger.'
The most amazing WHO adventure yet,
in which Doctors One, Two and Three
cross time and space and come together
to fight a ruthlessly dangerous enemy ­
OMEGA. Once a Time Lord, now exiled
to a black hole in space, Omega is
seeking a bitter and deadly revenge
against the whole Universe . . .
DOCTOR WHO scripts ­ awarded The
1974 Writers' Guild Award for the best
British children's original drama script.




U.K. ................................................... 35p
NEW ZEALAND ..........$1.10
CANADA ..............................$1.35
MALTA .........................................40c             0 426 10938 4
           DOCTOR WHO
            THE THREE
             DOCTORS
 Based on the BBC television serial by Robert Baker and
Dave Martin by arrangement with the British Broadcasting
                      Corporation


             TERRANCE DICKS




                     published by
               The Paperback Division of
                W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd
A Target Book
Published in 1975
by the Paperback Division of W.H. Allen & Co. Plc
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

Novelisation copyright © 1975 by Terrance Dicks
Original script copyright © 1973 by Bob Baker and Dave
Martin
`Doctor Who' series copyright © 1975 by the British
Broadcasting Corporation

Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Anchor Brendon Ltd., Tiptree, Essex


ISBN 0 426 11578 3

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it
is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
                 CONTENTS
1 Lightning from Space
2 Attack from the Unknown
3 The Menace of the Black Hole
4 Beyond the Unknown
5 A Shock for the Brigadier
6 In the Hands of the Enemy
7 Door to Freedom
8 Escape from Omega
9 `All things shall be destroyed'
10 Return through the Flame
11 Three Doctors Minus Two
                        1
              Lightning from Space
For an adventure that was to be one of the most
astonishing of the Doctor's very long life, it all began very
quietly. It started, in fact, with a silvery-grey balloon,
drifting peacefully out of the blue morning sky to land on
the flat marshy ground of an Essex bird sanctuary.
Hanging from the balloon was a bright orange box, about
the size and shape of a car battery.
   The box bumped along the ground as a gust of wind
caught in the balloon. Then its attaching wires caught fast
in a clump of trees, and sent a flock of starlings shrieking
into the sky.
   On the other side of the trees a stocky grey-haired man,
in anorak and rubber boots, paused to listen. Arthur Hollis
was the warden of the Bird sanctuary, and he knew at once,
by the note of outrage in the starlings' voices, that
something unusual had happened. He made his way round
the trees, and saw the brightly coloured box swinging to
and fro like a stranded parachutist. He walked up to it
cautiously. As he got closer he saw thick black letters on
the side of the box. They read: `Reward! Please Contact Dr.
Tyler.' An address and telephone number followed. Hollis
rubbed his chin. He didn't like mysterious objects turning
up in his bird sanctuary.
   The sooner it was out of there the better. He copied the
telephone number on a scrap of paper. Suddenly the box
crackled. Hollis jumped back. He looked at it cautiously.
Nothing happened. Shaking his head suspiciously, Hollis
gave the box a last distrustful glare and set off for his
cottage.

Several hours later, a battered and muddy Land Rover
jolted down the bumpy lane to the bird sanctuary. It was
driven by a tubby, fair-haired little man in an old duffle-
coat. He pulled up outside the Warden's cottage and got
out.
   A pleasant-looking middle-aged woman in an apron
came down the cottage path. `Dr. Tyler, is it ? From the
University?'
   Tyler nodded. `That's me. Sorry to be a trouble. Thanks
very much for calling--'
   The woman interrupted him, her voice a little anxious,
`That old box of yours is just through the trees there.' She
pointed across the fields to a small hill. Tyler could just see
the silver-grey of the balloon as it caught the sunlight. `My
Arthur's keeping an eye on it for you,' she went on. `He
hasn't touched it. Not chemicals, I hope? Only, it's the
birds, you see. He took his shot-gun in case it was
dangerous.'
   Tyler shook his head vigorously. `No, nothing like that.
Just instruments. Thanks very much, Mrs. Hollis, I'll go
and find your husband.' He set off towards the trees at an
eager pace. As he approached the hill, he called out, `Mr.
Hollis! Mr. Hollis!'
   He saw Hollis appear over the brow of the hill, wave and
point downwards. The box was obviously on the other side,
just out of sight.
   Vastly relieved that the mysterious object would soon be
off his hands, Hollis decided to speed the process by
unhooking it from the tree, where it was still swinging
gently to and fro. It took him only a moment to free the
clamps attaching the box to its wires, but the box was
surprisingly heavy, and as he took the full weight of it he
stumbled forwards, and fell on top of the box as it hit the
ground. There was a sudden fierce crackle, a flash of light,
and Arthur Hollis vanished.
   Tyler came puffing over the hill. The balloon still
flapped about in the tree top, the box rested at the foot of
the tree. But of Arthur Hollis there was no sign. Tyler
looked round unbelievingly. He'd seen the man just a
minute ago. And there was nowhere he could be hiding--
just flat, empty fields all around. Tyler walked up to the
box and looked at it. Just the familiar type of instrument
box he'd handled a hundred times before. Heaving it up,
he clasped it to his chest and set off for the cottage at a
stumbling run.

Later that day, the box was sitting on a laboratory bench
while Tyler, for what seemed the hundredth time,
explained what had happened.
   `So there you are. Mrs, Hollis says her husband's with
the box, I see him wave, get there, and there he is--gone!
So I phone the police, and they whizz me off to see you lot.'
   Tyler looked round at his audience. There were three of
them. A very small, very pretty, fair-haired girl. A tall man
with a clipped moustache, wearing the uniform of a
Brigadier. And an even taller man, flamboyantly dressed in
a velvet smoking-jacket and ruffled shirt, who seemed to be
known only as `the Doctor'.
   Brigadier Alastair Lethbridge-Stewart, head of the
British section of the United Nations Intelligence
Taskforce (UNIT for short), beamed approvingly. `Quite
right too, that's what we're here for--eh, Doctor?'
   The Doctor gave him an enigmatic look and said
nothing. Jo Grant, the Doctor's assistant, was examining
the box that was the centre of attention. `Dr. Tyler,' she
asked suddenly, `what's it for?'
   The Brigadier frowned at her disapprovingly, and then
realised he didn't really know the answer himself. He
looked at Tyler enquiringly.
   The little man seemed surprised that anyone should
need to ask. `Cosmic-ray research, of course.' He gave the
box a tap. `In there is the most sophisticated cosmic-ray
monitoring device between here and Cape Kennedy.' He
flashed them a sudden, disarming grin. `I ought to know
because I knocked it up myself from odds and ends in the
lab. As a matter of fact...' Tyler hesitated awkwardly.
    The Doctor gave him an encouraging smile. `As a matter
of fact, what?' he asked gently.
    `Well, I'd been meaning to get in touch with somebody
official anyway, even before this business.'
    `And why was that?'
    Tyler took a deep breath, then seemed to come to some
kind of decision. `Pass me that briefcase, will you, young
lady?' Jo Grant passed over the bulging briefcase Tyler had
brought with him, staggering under the unexpected
weight. Tyler fished out a sheaf of papers, all mixed up
with what looked like X-ray prints. `We've been getting
some pretty amazing results on these latest tests.' He sorted
out one of the prints and handed it to the Doctor, who held
it up to the light. Jo peered at it too. All she could see was a
scattering of tiny white spots against the darkness of the
negative.
    `There's an early one, d'you see,' said Tyler. `Just your
average-density cosmic-ray bombardment. But on the last
one, we got this!' He handed over another print. The
Doctor held it up, and this time Jo saw what looked like a
jagged sheet of lightning slashing right across the print.
She heard the Doctor's sudden intake of breath. `Good
grief!'
    `Aye,' said Tyler grimly. `And now take a look at these!'
He handed the Doctor a tattered roll of papers covered
with figures. Jo guessed that they were computer print-outs
of some kind.
    A moment later the Doctor looked up. `If these readings
are correct, Dr. Tyler, this--whatever-it-is--travels faster
than light!'
    `That's right,' said Tyler simply. `And it can't, can it?'
He looked up at the Doctor's tall figure. `I don't know what
to make of it, Doctor, and that's the truth. You know what
it makes me think of? A shriek of pain, travelling across
the Galaxy! It's come all that way, through millions of star
systems. It must have been--directed. Directed at us!
Why?'
   Gently the Doctor put the prints back on the bench,
`Why indeed. Dr. Tyler!' He took a fresh batch of print-
outs from Tyler, and began poring over them, quite
oblivious to everything else.
   The Brigadier cleared his throat meaningfully. What
had started off as a fairly straightforward disappearance
seemed to have wandered off into the realms of cosmic-ray
research. `The point is, Doctor, has this space-lightning of
yours got anything to do with the vanishing of this chap
Hollis?'
   `Oh I should think so, wouldn't you?' The Doctor
looked up at the Brigadier, and then back at the prints on
the bench. `Space-lightning... you know, that's rather good.
Brigadier. It does look a bit like lightning.'
   The Brigadier looked pleased, then was immediately
deflated as the Doctor went on, `Only of course it isn't
lightning. Nothing like it.'
   `Do you know what it is. Doctor?' asked Jo.
   `Well, if there were such a thing, I should say it was
compressed light. Yes that's it--a sort of controlled
superlucent emission.'
   The Brigadier sighed. He was used to the fact that most
of the Doctor's explanations left him none the wiser.
   The Doctor leaped to his feet. `Mr. Tyler, is this cosmic-
ray device of yours functioning normally?'
   `As far as I know. Haven't developed the plate yet of
course.'
   `Then I suggest you do so at once. I think you'll find all
the necessary equipment over there. If you need anything
else, the Brigadier will get it for you. Come along, Jo.'
   Obediently, Jo started to follow the Doctor. The
Brigadier snapped, `May I ask where you're off to?'
   `To take a look at the scene of the disappearance of
course.' The Doctor grabbed his cloak from behind the
door and set off. Jo gave the Brigadier a `What-can-you-
do?' look, and hurried after him.
   Tyler wandered over to the cupboard indicated by the
Doctor and opened it. The shelves were crammed with
every kind of scientific equipment. He spotted one of the
latest types of automatic developer, fished it out, carried it
over to a bench and started checking it over. Looking up,
he saw the Brigadier glaring down at him.
    `All right, old chap, I can manage,' said Tyler kindly.
`I'll give you a shout if I need anything.'
    The Brigadier seemed to be controlling himself with an
effort. `That's very kind of you. Dr. Tyler,' he said between
gritted teeth. `Do make yourself at home. Liberty Hall, Dr.
Tyler, Liberty Hall!' Slamming the door behind him, the
Brigadier marched off down the corridor.
    Tyler shook his head in mild astonishment. Funny
chap, that. Still, you could never tell with soldiers. Peculiar
lot.
    Satisfied that the developer was in working order Tyler
carefully extracted the plate from the orange box and
slipped it inside. There was a low hum as he switched on
the developer, and a few minutes later, the print popped
out of the machine. Tyler held it up to the light, and
almost dropped it from sheer surprise. The same jagged
streak ran across the print. But it was superimposed across
the blurred picture of a screaming face. It was a face Tyler
had seen before, though only for a few seconds--that of the
vanished Arthur Hollis.
    Tyler shook his head, trying to keep his grasp on reality.
`That shouldn't happen,' he muttered. `That shouldn't
happen at all.' He went back to the orange box and started
to undo the clamps and screws which held on the lid. His
fingers carried out the familiar process automatically, his
mind still grappling with the mystery of what he had just
seen. He began taking out pieces of electronic equipment
and laying them on the bench. Then he saw there was
something else in the box. Huddled in one corner was what
looked like a blob of jelly. Tyler reached and poked it.
There was a sudden fierce crackle. Like Arthur Hollis
before him, Tyler vanished.
   For a moment the blob of jelly lay inert in the corner of
the box. Then it climbed slowly up the side, quivered on
the edge, and plopped down on the laboratory bench. At
first it was motionless, as if puzzled by the new
environment. Then it slid along the bench, dropped into
the little sink and vanished down the plug-hole. The
laboratory was empty.

The Doctor, Jo Grant and Mrs. Hollis trudged up to the
top of the little hill and paused for breath. Mrs. Hollis
pointed.
   `There's your old balloon, down there.' They could see
the silvery shape flapping about in the breeze, still tethered
to its tree. The Doctor nodded, and they walked down the
hill towards it.
   At the foot of the tree the Doctor immediately started
casting about, reminding Jo irresistibly of a hound looking
for a scent. Fishing in his pockets he produced a gadget
rather like a miniature geiger-counter, and started testing
the area. Jo saw he was totally absorbed, and turned to Mrs.
Hollis, She was watching the Doctor with an indulgent
smile, like a mother who sees her child occupied with his
new chemistry set. `Mrs. Hollis,' asked Jo, `I don't suppose
there's been any sign of your husband--since this
morning?'
   `No, m'dear, that there hasn't. Still, nothing unusual in
that!'
   `You're not worried, then?'
   `Bless you, why should I be? My Arthur's gone off
somewhere. We shan't see him now till dark.'
   `Dr. Tyler did say he'd disappeared.'
   Mrs. Hollis chuckled placidly. `No doubt he did. You
see, my Arthur, he's a bit of a shy one. Don't take to
strangers much. He'll have pointed out the balloon, then
slipped away quiet-like.'
   `Wouldn't Dr. Tyler have seen him?'
   `See my Arthur? Not if he didn't want him to!'
   Jo sighed. Could it all be as simple as that? Was Arthur
Hollis placidly watching his birds on some distant part of
the reserve? She looked down at the Doctor. Crouched on
one knee, he was slowly moving his instrument over a little
patch of ground. Jo saw the dials flicker, and, very faintly,
she thought she heard a crackle.
   The Doctor straightened up, and put his instrument
back in his pocket. `Thank you for all your help, Mrs.
Hollis. We'd better be going now.'
   As they walked back towards the cottage, Mrs. Hollis
said helpfully, `If you really need to see my Arthur, I could
try to find him for you.'
   The Doctor said, `Never mind, Mrs. Hollis, it isn't that
important.'
   Outside the little cottage they said goodbye to Mis.
Hollis, climbed into `Bessie', the Doctor's Edwardian
roadster, and drove off. Jo looked at the Doctor. He was
driving fast but carefully, as he always did, but she could
see that his mind was far away. `It is, important, isn't it,
Doctor--whatever happened back there?'
   `Far more important than I'd realised.'
   `What were you testing for with that gadget?
Radioactivity?'
   `No. Anti-matter,' replied the Doctor briefly.
   `What's that?'
   `Something that can't exist--not in this Universe
anyway.'
   In that case why look for it? thought Jo. But she could
see the Doctor was in no mood for further questions.

At UNIT H.Q. the Brigadier had a lot of questions, and he
wasn't getting answers to any of them. Feeling a little
contrite at the abrupt way he'd spoken to Dr. Tyler--after
all it wasn't Tyler's fault if the Doctor was so irritating--
the Brigadier had popped back to the laboratory to ask the
little man how he was getting on. But Doctor Tyler seemed
to have vanished. A thorough check of the building had
produced no sign of him, and the Brigadier sat irritably
tapping a pencil on his desk, wondering how he was going
to explain a mysterious disappearance from his own
headquarters. Sergeant Benton popped his head cautiously
round the door. `Report from the main gate, sir. The
Doctor's just appeared.'
   `Well tell him his friend Tyler's just disappeared--and
ask him to come and see me right away.' Benton withdrew
his head and went to look for the Doctor, thankful for an
excuse to get out of the Brigadier's immediate vicinity.

The Doctor, meanwhile, was driving Bessie into UNIT'S
extensive car park. He swung his long legs over the side of
the little car. `Come on, Jo, let's see if Tyler learned
anything from that machine of his.'
    Obediently Jo scrambled out after him, and they started
walking towards the main building. As usual, the Doctor's
longer strides took him in front of Jo, and she was running
to catch up when she heard a sudden crackle. She stopped,
listened. The crackle came again. It was coming from one
of the drains at the side of the building. Something was
coming out of it... a big blob of some kind of jelly, about
the size of a football. It was shot through with iridescent
colours, like a patch of oil on a wet pavement. And it was
hard to focus your eyes on, as if in some strange way it
wasn't quite there. Yet it was there. Rubbing her eyes,
staring with a kind of fascinated horror, Jo backed away.
    She tried to call out, but her voice seemed stuck in her
throat. `Doctor,' she croaked, `Doctor!'
    The blob of jelly seemed to react to the sound of her
voice. With a threatening crackle it began moving towards
her...
                       2
           Attack from the Unknown
Jo screamed, and the Doctor turned to see what was the
matter. She was backing away, the blob of jelly slithering
remorselessly after her. The Doctor called, `Jo--stand still.'
With considerable effort, Jo forced herself to stop. The
blob stopped too. Then, as the Doctor moved cautiously
towards it, the blob changed direction, and started rolling
slowly towards him. `Jo,' he called, `do exactly as I say. Start
backing away slowly towards the door.'
    Jo obeyed. The Doctor meanwhile began to circle
cautiously around the blob, doing his best to lead it away
from Jo. Unerringly the blob followed his every change of
direction almost, as if it was tracking him. Jo called
shakily, `Doctor, what is that thing?'
    `Never mind that now. When I tell you to run--run!'
    The Doctor started manoeuvring round his car, so that
`Bessie' was between him and the blob. `Now, Jo, run!' he
yelled. Jo sprinted for the door. For a moment the blob
hesitated, as if wondering whether to follow her. Then,
with terrifying speed, it made a sudden rush at the Doctor.
As the blob shot towards `Bessie', the Doctor ducked round
the other side of the little car and sprinted after Jo. She was
hesitating by the open door, reluctant to abandon him,
when the Doctor hurtled through and, scooping Jo up
before him, slammed the door shut and bolted it from the
other side. As he did so a bright, silent flash came from
behind them. They looked through the glass panel in the
upper part of the door. The Doctor's little roadster had
simply vanished. They were just in time to see the blob of
jelly slither across the garage floor and disappear down the
drain from which it had first appeared.

The Brigadier looked up impatiently as Bentonentered the
office.
    `Well ?' he snapped.
    Benton swallowed hard. `Still no sign of Dr. Tyler, sir.
I've re-checked the entire building. He's certainly not
inside, but all the gate sentries swear he hasn't left.'
    `What about our Doctor--or have you managed to lose
him as well?'
    The Brigadier's phone rang, and he snatched it up.
Somehow he felt sure that it would be more bad news. He
was not disappointed. He listened to the excited voice at
the other end of the phone, `What do you mean?' he
barked. `An explosion in the garage? I heard nothing...'
    To Benton's relief the Doctor chose that moment to
walk in. He looked calm and unruffled--which was more
than could be said for Jo Grant, who followed close behind
him. The Brigadier looked up, `Ah there you are!
Apparently there was some kind of flash...'
    `There was indeed,' agreed the Doctor.
    `What happened? One of your gadgets misfire?'
    The Doctor frowned. `I'm not really sure, yet. Let's say
there was an energy-release of some kind,'
    `There was this horrible great blob of jelly,' Jo burst out,
`and Bessie's just vanished...' She gave an excited report of
events in the garage.
    When she had finished the Brigadier gazed at her in
stark disbelief. He looked at the Doctor for confirmation.
The Doctor nodded. `A rather incoherent account, but
substantially correct.'
    `We've been having a little mystery of our own,' said the
Brigadier grimly. He went on to tell the Doctor about the
vanishing of Dr. Tyler.
    The Doctor seemed unsurprised. `I shouldn't bother to
look for him any more. I'm very much afraid he's gone
where Mr. Hollis went. Where Bessie's gone too, come to
that.'
    The Brigadier struggled on valiantly. `What about this
jelly--this thing that attacked you in the garage? What is
it? Where does it fit in with all this business about Hollis
and Dr. Tyler?'
    The Doctor dropped into a chair, swinging his long legs
up to rest his heels on the Brigadier's desk-top. `As far as I
can guess--and it is only a guess so far--the jelly, thing, as
you call it, is some kind of organism. An organism with a
powerful hunting instinct. I believe it travelled to Earth by
means of Dr. Tyler's "space-lightning", using his cosmic-
ray device for the last stage of the journey.'
    `Sort of like hitching a lift?' suggested Jo brightly.
Everyone ignored her.
    `All that's as may be,' snapped the Brigadier. `What
concerns us now is that the thing's here. Why? What does
it want?'
    The Doctor cleared his throat. `I hate to sound
immodest,' he said gently, `but I'm very much afraid it
wants me'
    The Brigadier looked at him in exasperation. `Are you
seriously trying to tell me, Doctor, that this whole thing
has been arranged for your benefit?'
    `In the garage,' said Jo slowly, `as soon as it got near you,
it ignored me.'
    The Brigadier got up. `Well, whatever it is, it's arrived
and it's hostile. What do we do? How do we find it?'
    The Doctor, too, rose to his feet. `No need for us to try
and find it, Brigadier. If we wait, it will find us.'

In the darkness of the drainage system under the UNIT
building the blob of jelly lay motionless, waiting. Suddenly
it began to glow and crackle with energy. And it started to
grow. As it grew, it divided into two. Each of those two
pieces divided yet again. The process continued. Two
pieces, four pieces, eight pieces, sixteen pieces, thirty-two
pieces... Soon an army of them swarmed through the
drainage pipes, making their way towards the surface...
   In a quiet side-road at the back of UNIT H.Q., a
glowing, crackling blob of jelly emerged from a drain. For
a moment it lay in the gutter, then it started to grow,
swelling to the size of a man. As it grew, it changed, taking
on roughly, very roughly, the shape of a man. A huge figure
with round featureless head and thick blobby arms and
legs, it stood motionless for a moment, then began
shambling purposefully towards UNIT. A moment later
another blob of jelly emerged crackling from the drain. It
too began to grow and change shape. Before very long, a
second nightmarish creature lurched off after the first.
    All round the UNIT building, the same process was
being repeated. The blobs of jelly emerged from drains,
grew, changed shape, and began their remorseless advance.
Before very long a hideous, shambling, monstrous army
was encircling UNIT H.Q., moving in closer and closer.
    The main gate sentry saw them first, and frankly didn't
believe his eyes. A quivering line of faceless horrors
marched steadily towards him. Too astonished to challenge
them, or even to give the alarm, he simply opened fire at
the nearest with his Sterling submachine gun. It didn't
help. He saw the bullets slice through the jelly-like
substance of the creatures' bodies. They continued their
advance without even a pause.
    Corporal Palmer, in charge of the guard, ran out from
his guard-room at the sound of the shooting. He saw the
terrified sentry, too frightened even to reload, clutching an
empty gun and backing slowly away. Shoving the soldier in
front of him, he dashed back into the guard-room and
sounded the General Alarm siren. Its harsh wailing note
set the whole building in motion. Soldiers carrying arms
ran at once to their battle stations, those without made for
the armoury, where the Armourer was already issuing
rifles, grenades and Sterlings.
    Sergeant Benton used his rank to jump the queue and
grabbed an anti-tank rifle. Experience of hostile alien life-
forms had taught him that the heavier your armament the
better. Shouldering the cumbersome weapon with ease, he
ran to see what the blazes was going on.
   All around the building he found a weird battle taking
place. The terrifying jelly-creatures were swarming
everywhere, ignoring the fusillade of shots being poured
into them. Yet despite their fearsome appearance, they
didn't seem to hurt you unless you touched them. As
Benton ran up to the main gate, he saw a terrified soldier
stumble into one of them. A crackle of energy threw the
man a good twenty feet, smashing him into the wall.
   Dropping to one knee, Benton levelled his anti-tank gun
and fired. With a dull `crump' the explosive shell blasted
the jelly-creature into a hundred pieces. Benton smiled in
satisfaction--then he saw the little blobs of jelly roll back
together into a great blob, and the creature start moving
towards him once more. Dodging out of its way, he
grabbed for his walkie-talkie.
   In the Doctor's laboratory, Jo Grant listened as Benton's
voice came through on the field-radio. From all around she
could hear the rattle of gunfire, the sound of exploding
grenades. She looked across at the Doctor. Absorbed in a
batch of Tyler's computer print-outs, he seemed to be
ignoring the whole battle.
   She heard the Brigadier say, `All right, Sergeant Benton,
move the men out. Complete evacuation!' He turned to the
Doctor, and snapped, `Doctor, for heaven's sake! We're
under attack. What are these creatures? Where do they
come from?'
   The Doctor looked up, `Obviously from the same source
as that thing in the garage. First the scout, then the
reinforcements. Sound grasp of military tactics, wouldn't
you say. Brigadier?'
   The Brigadier exploded. `Never mind all that--what do
we do?'
   `Nothing,' said the Doctor calmly. `They're not
interested in you or your men. Keep out of their way and
they won't harm you.'
   `What about you, Doctor?'
   The Doctor nodded at the TARDIS in the corner.
`Don't worry, I'll be all right. You go and look after your
men. Brigadier.'
   This was a suggestion the Brigadier found hard to
refuse. The safety of his men was always his first concern.
   `Very well, Doctor, if you're sure. Come along, Miss
Grant.' The Brigadier ran out of the room. Jo didn't move.
   The Doctor said gently, `I really think you ought to
leave as well, Jo.'
   She shook her head determinedly. `And walk into one of
those nasties? Not a chance. I'm staying with you.'
   `Please, Jo. It's only when you are with me that you're in
any danger. On your own you can walk straight by them
and they'll ignore you.'
   The ground-floor window was thrown up, and Sergeant
Benton climbed over the sill. `Doctor, Miss Grant,' he
yelled. `You've got to get out of here. Those things are
making straight for the lab.'
   The Doctor picked Jo up bodily and carried her across
to the window.
   `On the contrary, Sergeant Benton, you get out of here.
And take Miss Grant with you, if you have to carry her!'
   He tried to pass Jo over to Benton. She said, `Oh no you
don't' and started struggling wildly. Before they could all
untangle themselves, there was a sudden flash and the
laboratory door disappeared. A milling crowd of the jelly-
creatures at once filled the empty space. They had already
begun to recombine merging into one another to form a
huge blob, a larger version of the one that had attacked
them in the garage. It was as though, their target found,
they no longer needed their ghastly attempt at a human
shape.
   Another blob, equally large, appeared at the window,
cutting off their retreat. As the two masses of jelly lurched
towards them the Doctor ran to the TARDIS and unlocked
the door. Into the TARDIS, both of you,' he snapped. He
bundled Jo and Sergeant Benton inside, then leaped in
after them, shutting the TARDIS door just as the
combined mass of jelly slammed against it.
    Inside the TARDIS the Doctor ran to the control
console and started flicking switches. With its usual
groaning sound the centre column began moving up and
down.
    Jo looked surprised, `I thought the TARDIS was
grounded, Doctor?'
    `So it is! But while it's ticking over, the force-field is in
operation.' Jo suddenly noticed Sergeant Benton, who was
standing quite still, his eyes wide open, his mouth,
clamped shut. She realised it was the first time he had ever
been inside the TARDIS, and smiled sympathetically. She
could well remember how she'd felt on first seeing the big
gleaming control room that was so impossibly packed
inside the battered old police box. The Doctor followed the
direction of her glance. He too smiled to see the big
Sergeant standing almost to attention with astonishment.
`Well,' asked the Doctor briskly, `aren't you going to say
"It's bigger on the inside than on the outside"? Everyone
else does.'
    Benton made an effort to keep his voice steady. `That's
pretty obvious, isn't it? Anyway, nothing to do with you
surprises me now, Doc!'
    The Doctor chuckled, went across to the console and
switched on the scanner screen. The others gathered round
him, looking at the scene inside the laboratory. The jelly-
creature, all its parts now combined into one enormous
lump, was lashing to and fro, throwing out occasional
tentacles, rather like a giant amoeba. Whenever it touched
the TARDIS it recoiled with an angry crackle, but
whenever it touched anything else there was a fierce silent
flash, and that object vanished. Chairs, desk, laboratory
benches, cupboards, they all went, until the laboratory was
virtually empty. Except, that is, for the TARDIS, which
still sat stubbornly in its corner.
    Jo looked away from the screen with a shudder. `What's
it doing, Doctor?'
    `Trying to carry out its instructions, I imagine, and
getting in a rare old tizzy because it can't.' The Doctor
opened a concealed hatch in the console. Beneath it was a
tiny red button. He looked at it for a long time, and sighed.
`It's no good. I'll have to use it.' Almost as if forcing
himself, he pressed the little button and closed the hatch.
    `Use what?' asked Jo, curiously.
    `The SOS--this is one of the very few times in my life
when I've had to ask Them for help.'
    Jo knew that the Doctor was talking about his own race,
the mysterious all-powerful Time Lords. It was by their
decree that he was presently exiled to Earth, and to have to
ask for their help must have cost him a great deal. She said,
`Things must be pretty serious then.'
    The Doctor looked at the scanner screen, which showed
the angry jelly-monster still thrashing angrily about in the
empty laboratory.
    `They are, Jo. Very serious indeed. The whole of the
Universe is in danger!'
                   3
       The Menace of the Black Hole
On a monitor screen, millions of light-years away across
the galaxies, the Doctor's SOS showed up as a tiny
blinking light. The monitor was one of many in the vast
Temporal Control Room of the Time Lords. It was many
years since the Doctor had stood in that room. If he could
have seen it at this moment, he would have been shocked
and horrified.
   Usually the Temporal Control Room was a busy
bustling place, hundreds of monitor screens glowing
brightly, Time Lords moving around busily as they carried
out their work of charting the Time Streams of the
Universe, keeping a benevolent and watchful eye on
innumerable planets and times. But now the huge hall was
in semi-darkness, only a few of the Temporal Monitors
were still in operation, their lights glowing faintly in the
surrounding gloom. Across the almost empty hall walked
two Senior Time Lords, the President of the High Council
and his Chancellor. Their appearance would have given the
Doctor the greatest shock of all. Despite their age and
wisdom, the Senior Time Lords had always been lively,
vigorous figures, burning with energy and authority. But
this was true no longer. Under the dignity of the flowing,
ornamental robes were two tired and frightened old men.
   The Chancellor looked at the winking light of the
Doctor's signal. `The Doctor is still holding out?'
   The President nodded sadly. `We were about to seek his
help. Now he asks for ours. And we have none to give him.'
   The Chancellor brooded for a moment. `And the source
of our present energy loss--it is still under observation?'
   The President led him to another monitor nearby. This
screen showed a panorama of deep space, filled with
thousands of stars. But at the centre of it all, there was a
sinister change. A jagged black hole in space, which
seemed to pulse and quiver with evil life.
    `A hole in space,' said the Chancellor slowly. `A no-
where, a no-place, a void. According to all known scientific
laws, nothing can exist there. Yet somehow, through that
hole, vital cosmic energy is draining away despite all we
can do to stop it.'
    The President checked some readings on a nearby
control console. `The energy loss is worsening, my lord.
Soon the Time Travel facility itself will be endangered.
Without it we shall be helpless.' He smashed his fist down
on the console. `We are being consumed, my lord, by a
Force equal yet opposite to our own, from the Universe of
Anti-matter. I am sure that this attack on the Doctor is yet
another manifestation of that Force.'
    The Chancellor led the way back to the screen showing
the SOS. `Ah yes, the Doctor,' he brooded.
    `He has asked for our help, and it is our duty to give it.
Whatever his errors, he is still a Time Lord.'
    `No-one can be spared, my lord. Everyone, every scrap of
our power, is needed to combat the energy-drain. Unless...
unless... Yes ! It's the only way. If your excellency will
accompany me?'
    With suddenly renewed energy, the President strode to
another section of the vast Control Room. Scurrying a
little, his dignity forgotten, the Chancellor followed him.
The two old men halted before a darkened screen where a
Junior Time Lord sat in gloomy idleness. He started, as the
President tapped him on the shoulder. `Show me a section
of the Doctor's earlier time stream--before he changed his
appearance.' Astonished, the young Time Lord, a boy of a
mere two hundred years, glanced up at his superior's face.
`Show me!' ordered the President. The young Time Lord's
hands flickered over the complex controls before him, and
the screen glowed into life. A picture formed, the savage
and hostile landscape of some primitive planet. Across it
was running a rather small man in eccentric and colourful
clothing. From the pace at which he was moving it seemed
likely that something very nasty indeed was after him.
   The President turned triumphantly to the Chancellor.
`You see, my lord? We cannot help the Doctor, but perhaps
he can help himself!'
   The Chancellor was appalled. `I forbid it. You cannot
allow him to cross his own time stream and meet his earlier
self. The First Time Law expressly forbids--'
   The President interrupted him, in itself an unheard-of
audacity. He gestured round the almost-empty, darkened
hall. `We are all of us fighting for our lives. Is this a time
for rules?'
   `You cannot do this!'
   The President's voice was firm. `My lord, I must. I must
and I will. It is the Doctor's only hope. Ours too, perhaps.'
   For a moment the two old men glared at each other. The
Junior Time Lord sat like a mouse, scarcely daring to
breathe. The Chancellor's eyes fell first. `Very well. On
your own head be it.' Salvaging his dignity as best he
could, the Chancellor turned and strode from the hall. The
President turned to the quaking young Time Lord and
began rapping out instructions. Once again the Junior
Time Lord's hands began moving across the controls...

The Doctor, Jo and Sergeant Benton gazed gloomily at the
TARDIS's scanner screen. It showed the inside of the
laboratory, now almost completely bare, the glowing,
crackling mass of the jelly thrashing to and fro, unable to
complete its mission and engulf the TARDIS itself. From
time to time it extruded a tentacle and touched it, drawing
back with an angry crackle as it was repelled by the
protective force-field. Suddenly the TARDIS vibrated,
almost as if it had landed. The Doctor looked suspiciously
at his two companions. `What was that? Nobody touched
anything, did they?'
   Jo and Benton shook their heads in denial. A round
wooden object rolled across the floor and stopped by the
Doctor's foot. He picked it up, frowning. `Some kind of
flute! Is it yours, Jo?'
   Jo shook her head. The Doctor examined the little
instrument curiously.
   `The funny thing is, it seems strangely familiar. A
flute...' The Doctor rubbed his chin, trying to recapture a
fugitive trace of memory.
   A hand sneaked under his arm and neatly plucked the
flute from his fingers. `Properly speaking,' said a rather
huffy voice, `the instrument is known as a recorder!'
   They all whirled round. Standing just behind them was
a middle-sized, middle-aged man in a shabby old frock coat
and rather baggy check trousers. His untidy black hair
hung in a fringe over his forehead, and his dark brown eyes
were at once humorous and sad. Jo Grant took to him
instantly, and instinctively smiled at him. The stranger
smiled back, and gave a little trill on the recorder. He
frowned, tried again, and looked accusingly at the Doctor.
`You haven't been trying to play it, have you?' The Doctor
seemed too astonished to reply. The stranger looked round
the TARDIS, and spotted the picture on the scanner
screen. He rushed up to it with child-like curiosity. `Oh
dear, oh dear, we are in trouble, aren't we? Just as well I
turned up!'
   Suddenly he noticed Benton who was looking at him
open-mouthed. To Jo's astonishment, Benton said, `Hullo,
Doctor! Where did you spring from?'
   The newcomer rushed up to Benton and shook him
warmly by the hand. `Corporal Benton, isn't it? Haven't
seen you since that nasty business with the Cybermen.
How's the dear old Brigadier?'
   Benton tapped his sleeve. `Actually, it's Sergeant Benton
now, Doc. And the Brig's fine.'
   `My dear fellow, congratulations.' The strange little man
shook Benton's hand again.
   Jo sidled up to the Doctor. `Who is he? Is he one of
Them?' Jo gazed upwards, with the gesture she instinctively
used whenever she referred to the Time Lords.
   The Doctor sighed. `Not exactly, Jo. He's not so much
one of Them as one of me!'
   The stranger came across to Jo, putting a friendly arm
across her shoulders. `Oh no, no, no, it isn't that at all. I
hate to seem contrary, but I do feel you should have the
correct explanation.' He pointed to the tall elegant figure of
the Doctor who was glaring down at him in mounting
outrage. `The fact of the matter is,' said the newcomer
confidingly, `he is one of me.'
   In a state of total confusion, Jo looked from one to the
other of them. `You mean you're both Time Lords?'
   The little man patted her on the back. `Not just both
Time Lords, you see. Both the same Time Lord!' He
beamed at her triumphantly, as if this made everything
clear.
   Lifting the stranger's arm from her shoulders, the
Doctor drew Jo to his side. `Please, you're only confusing
my assistant. The fact of the matter is, Jo, he is me, and I
am him!' Jo buried her head in her hands.
   Benton said suddenly, `Maybe I can help, miss. You see,
when I first met the Doctor here...' Benton pointed to the
tall white-haired man at Jo's side, `he looked like him!' He
nodded towards the stranger.
   Jo struggled to understand. She looked at the little man.
`You mean you're the Doctor as he used to be--before he
changed? Then in that case how did you get here--and
now?'
   `That's what I'd like to know,' said the Doctor
indignantly. `You've absolutely no right to pop up like this.
What about the First Time Law?'
   `Oh bother the First Time Law,' said the little man. (In
order to avoid confusion, Jo decided to think of him as
Doctor Two.) `Don't you realise this is an emergency? Our
fellow Time Lords are under siege, and they've sent me to
help you. Your effectiveness is now doubled.'
   The Doctor snorted. `Doubled? Halved, more like it,
with you to look after!'
   Doctor Two said, `Now don't be ungracious, old chap. I
think the first thing to do is for me to put you in the
picture.'
   The Doctor opened his mouth to protest, but before he
could say anything, Doctor Two reached out and put a
hand to his temple with a curiously formal gesture. It was
obviously familiar to the Doctor, for he grunted a rather
surly, `Oh all right,' and put his hand to the newcomer's
temple in the same way.
   `Contact!' said Doctor Two firmly, and the two Time
Lords became instantly motionless.
   Jo and Benton looked on in astonishment. The two very
different figures were standing absolutely still, but you
could almost feel the power of the mental energy flowing
between them. Suddenly Jo realised what was going on.
`Look,' she whispered to Benton, `they're having some
kind of telepathic conference.'
   And that, indeed, was exactly what was happening. In
the newcomer's mind was flooding everything that had
happened since the arrival of the cosmic-ray research
balloon at the bird sanctuary; the vanishing of Hollis, and
of Tyler; the sudden attack of the jelly and the creatures it
had formed. In return, the Doctor received a full history of
the sudden appearance of the black hole in space and of the
way it was gradually draining the cosmic energy of the
Time Lords, and threatening to disintegrate the fabric of
the entire Universe. In a matter of seconds the process was
complete and the two Doctors stepped apart, their faces
equally grave.
   The first, Jo's Doctor, gazed thoughtfully at the scanner
screen where the scene in the lab was unchanged. The
second Doctor began to tootle on his flute. Jo found the
sound rather soothing, but it was soon apparent that the
Doctor didn't share her view.
   He turned angrily to his other self and snapped, `Must
you?'
   Doctor Two looked hurt. `It helps me to think!'
   `Well it stops me from thinking at all!'
   `Are we going to take this attitude to my music the
whole time?'
   `Quite frankly, yes we are. In a serious situation like
this, I've no time to listen to paratiddles on your piccolo!'
   In a matter of minutes the two Doctors were arguing
furiously. The air of the TARDIS rang with cries of
`Philistine!' and `Cacophony!' `Balderdash!' and `Tripe!'
   Jo glanced up at Benton doubtfully. It didn't look as if
this strange collaboration was going to work at all.

The same thought was occurring to the Junior Time Lord,
who was watching the scene on his monitor. He looked up,
as the imposing figure of the President came up to him.
   `We've achieved the transference you asked for, my lord
President, but I'm afraid it isn't working out too well.'
   `And why not?'
   The young Time Lord pointed to the gesticulating
figures on the screen. `All they do is quarrel, sir.'
   The President thought for a moment. Then he smiled. `I
suppose it's natural enough. Two opposing parts of the
same personality. They're too much alike to agree. They
need someone to keep them in order. Show me the
Doctor's first incarnation.'
   The Junior Time Lord swallowed hard. `Him too, sir?
But in view of the attitude of the Chancellor--'
   `We've already shattered the First Time Law, my boy. A
third Doctor won't make matters very much worse.'
   The Time Lord obeyed, making new adjustments to his
controls. The scene in the TARDIS faded, and slowly a
face appeared on the screen in its place, a lined, white-
haired old man with a face full of dignity, power, and a
touch of cranky bad temper.
   The President smiled. `Excellent. He'll keep them in
order.'
   The Junior Time Lord began to check the readings on
his console. `I don't think I can achieve a full physical
manifestation for you, my lord. The energy levels are
getting too low now.'
   `That isn't needed, my boy. All we need is a presence,
something to remind those impetuous youngsters down
there of their duty. Do the best you can...'
   Obediently, the Junior Time Lord bent over his
controls.

In the TARDIS, the two Doctors were distracted from
their argument when they noticed that the screen of the
TARDIS had suddenly gone blank. The new Doctor
rushed to the controls, and tried to get the picture back,
but with no success. He peered up accusingly at his other
self.
   `You've been fiddling with it, haven't you?'
   `It was perfectly all right until you touched it,' said the
Doctor rather unfairly. He bustled the newcomer away
from the console. `Now if you'd only leave things to me...'
   The second Doctor ducked indignantly round him in an
attempt to get at the controls. `Leave things to you? A fine
pickle we'd all be in!'
   In the heat of their dispute they both ignored the
scanner screen. Jo was the first to see a new picture
forming, the face of a rather cross-looking white-haired old
man. Faintly she said, `Doctors, look, both of you!'
   Both Doctors turned towards the screen. At the sight of
the face they seemed literally dumbstruck, as if someone
had turned off their voices. The fierce old man on the
screen surveyed them for a moment. It was obvious that
somehow he could see them--and he wasn't very
impressed. `So you're what I have become, are you? A
dandy and a clown!'
   The two Doctors stood before the screen like guilty
schoolboys sent to the headmaster, not daring to reply. The
old man sniffed disdainfully. `Well,' he said sharply, `what
have you done to deal with the problem? Anything?
Anything at all?'
   It was Doctor Two who plucked up courage to reply.
`We've er, assessed the situation,' he said, a little lamely.
   The old man on the screen sniffed again. `As I
thought--nothing. Other than squabble like a couple of
spoiled brats, that is.'
   The Doctor joined in. `Well it isn't all that easy, you
know.'
   The old man cut across him. `As I said. Nothing.'
   `So far we don't even know what that stuff is,' pleaded
Doctor Two.
   `Don't you? Then I'll tell you. It's a bridge. And what's a
bridge for, eh?'
   Rather to her own surprise Jo suddenly piped up
`Crossing?'
   The old man gave a shrill cackle. `Gel's got more sense
than the two of you put together! Exactly, crossing! So stop
dilly-dallying, you two. One of you must stay to keep an
eye on the situation here, and the other must cross it.'
With that his image faded from the screen. Immediately
both Doctors started to fiddle with the scanner control, but
succeeded only in getting in each other's way.
   `There, you've lost him,' said the Doctor accusingly.
   `I lost him?' said Doctor Two indignantly. `If you would
only leave the working of the TARDIS to someone who
understands it...'
   All at once the two Doctors were squabbling again.
There came a sudden parade-ground roar from Sergeant
Benton. `Oy, you two ! Pack that up!'
   Amazed, both Doctors fell silent. Taking advantage of
the lull, Jo asked, `Who was that?' She nodded towards the
screen, now once more showing the blob of jelly waiting in
the laboratory outside.
   Both Doctors answered her at once. `Us!'
   `Well,' said Jo sternly, `I think you ought to listen to
what he said, and stop being childish.
   For a moment both Doctors glared at her. Then the
mouth of the newer, smaller one twitched into a reluctant
grin. He looked up at his other self. `She's quite right, you
know.'
   The taller Doctor cleared his throat. `Harrumph! Well, I
hope that nothing I said about your music gave offence.
Rather a catchy little tune, actually.'
   `My dear fellow, think nothing of it. My fault entirely.'
   Their mutual apologies completed, the two Doctors
beamed affectionately at each other. Their faces became
serious again as they looked at the scanner screen. Doctor
Two fished in the pocket of his battered old coat and
produced a large silver coin. `Will you call?'
   He spun the coin high in the air.
   `Heads !' said the Doctor.
   Doctor Two caught the coin on the back of one hand,
slapping the palm of the other down on top of it. He lifted
his hand and looked at the coin. `Bad luck, old chap,' he
said hastily, and the coin disappeared into his pocket
before the Doctor could look at it.
   The Doctor threw him a suspicious look. `Right! If
you'll be ready to disconnect the force-field?'
   Jo and Sergeant Benton had been standing ignored in
the background.
   `Hey, just a minute,' protested Benton. `What are you
two up to?'
   The Doctors continued to ignore him. Doctor Two went
to the controls and switched off the force-field. He touched
another control, and the TARDIS door swung open.
Calmly the Doctor stepped out into the laboratory. Doctor
Two touched the control to close the door.
   With a shock of horror Jo suddenly realised what
`crossing the bridge' meant.
   The Doctor was going to deliver himself up to the jelly
and see where it took him. Before anyone could stop her,
she leaped through the already-closing TARDIS door and
tried to pull the Doctor back.
   The Tardis door swung to behind her.
    The Doctor called, `Jo, get back inside!' But the door
was already closed. Jo ran to the Doctor's arms for shelter
as, crackling greedily, the huge, shimmering mound of
jelly rolled towards them.
    On the TARDIS screen, Benton and the second Doctor
watched helplessly. The mound of jelly rolled over Jo and
the Doctor. As it touched them there came a brilliant,
soundless flash and Jo and the Doctor vanished.
                       4
              Beyond the Unknown
Sergeant Benton made an instinctive move to dash out of
the TARDIS. But the new Doctor, or as far as Benton was
concerned, the old Doctor, Jo's Doctor Two, laid a
restraining hand on his arm.
   `Steady on, Sergeant, they're out of our reach now. He
knew what he was doing--at least, I hope he did.'
   `Will they be all right, Doctor?'
   The little man reached up and patted Benton
reassuringly on the shoulder. `As far as I can tell, that stuff
out there has gone to a great deal of trouble to get me--or
rather, him--, and I doubt if whoever or whatever sent it
simply wanted us dead. No, they've both been transported
somewhere.'
   `I saw that--the question is, where?'
   Doctor Two shrugged. `Where indeed?' Suddenly he
darted over to the scanner and peered at it. `Do you know, I
think our blobby friend out there has just gone off the
boil.'
   Benton looked over his shoulder. The blob of jelly, now
shrunken and still, lay quietly in one corner of the
laboratory, showing no sign of its former ferocity. `Right,
let's get some explosives and blow it to smithereens,' said
Benton eagerly.
   `I think we can be a bit more subtle than that, Sergeant.
We must study it. It may still have a great deal to tell us.'
He opened the door of the TARDIS, and they both came
slowly out into the laboratory. Cautiously they approached
the jelly-blob. It stirred and crackled, but only very faintly.
   The door opened and the Brigadier, revolver in hand,
peered cautiously round it. At the sight of two figures
bending over to look at the blob he snapped, `For Heaven's
sake be careful of that stuff.'
   At the sound of his voice, Sergeant Benton straightened
up and turned round. So did the second Doctor.
   When he saw him the Brigadier opened his mouth like a
stranded fish, spluttering to get the words out. `Oh no!' he
gasped finally.
   Doctor Two beamed at him. `Oh yes, Brigadier. How are
you, my dear fellow?'
   `Pretty well, thanks,' said the Brigadier, returning the
handshake automatically. Then realising that he was
greeting a man who too all intents and purposes no longer
existed, he spluttered, `What the blazes is going on here?'
   `It's him, sir,' explained Benton rather obviously. `The
one we met first of all.'
   `I can see that. Why has he changed back again?'
   `He hasn't, sir, not exactly. This one just sort of popped
up. There are two of them now! There was even a third--
but he was only on the scanner screen.'
   `Heaven preserve us!' said the Brigadier faintly. He
looked for a stool to sit on, but by now they had all
disappeared. He leaned against the wall and spoke in a
voice of unnatural calm, `Sergeant Benton! Will you please
tell me exactly what's been going on?'
   Benton did his best. When he'd stumbled to the end of
his long, complicated and confused story, the second
Doctor said cheerfully:
   `There you are, Brigadier. All perfectly simple really.'
   `I'm sorry,' said the Brigadier crisply, `but I don't
believe a word of it. It's perfectly obvious what's happened.
You've been fiddling with that infernal machine of yours.
Somehow or other you've changed your appearance back,
and shot poor Miss Grant off heaven knows where.'
   Doctor Two sighed. `Believe what you like, Brigadier, as
long as it makes you happy.'
   The Brigadier straightened up. Now he'd found an
explanation that satisfied him, he was his old self again. `I
want two things from you, Doctor. An effective way of
controlling that jelly stuff, and the return of Miss Grant
safe and sound.'
   Doctor Two sighed. `I'll do my best for you. But I can't
promise anything. Wherever they are, Miss Grant and my
other self, we can't contact them. That's the trouble with
anti-matter. You can see the effect, but never the cause.' He
gave his sudden beaming smile. `Like a punch on the nose
from the invisible man!'
   The Brigadier waved his revolver at the blob, which still
lay inertly in its corner. `Then what is this stuff?'
   `That's anti-matter. The invisible man!'
   The Brigadier felt his head begin to spin. `But I thought
matter and anti-matter couldn't meet--not without a
colossal explosion.'
   `That's right. I'm afraid it means that whoever created
this stuff, and sent it here, is a good deal cleverer than we
are.'
   `Is there anything you can do, Doctor?'
   `I can study it. Try to learn some of its secrets. But first I
must make sure it stays harmless.'
   `And how do you propose to do that?'
   Doctor Two rubbed his hands. `I shall confuse it,' he
announced happily. `Feed it useless and conflicting
information.'
   He wandered round the laboratory, and suddenly flung
open the door of the Doctor's electronic spares cupboard. It
had escaped being `vanished', perhaps because it was `built-
in', flush to the wall. He examined the loaded shelves with
evident delight. Pulling out piece after piece of electronic
equipment, he gathered all he could carry and sat down
cross-legged on the floor. Benton looked on admiringly as
a complicated lash-up of equipment started taking shape
beneath the second Doctor's hands.
   `Pass me that induction coil, will you, Sergeant? Oh,
and I'd better have one of those booster circuits.'
   Hurriedly Benton obeyed, adding to the pile of
equipment on the floor.
   The Brigadier looked at the pair of them. They looked
like a couple of kids playing with a train-set. Deciding that
there was nothing useful he could say or do, he turned and
marched out of the laboratory.
   Benton and Doctor Two didn't even notice him go.

Jo Grant could never really decide what had actually
happened to her. The moment the rolling mass of the jelly-
blob touched them, the silent flash blinded her eyes. She
seemed to feel that the real world was dissolving around
her. She had a sensation, surely an illusion, of leaving the
earth altogether, of rushing headlong through space
towards a patch af deep impenetrable blackness, a kind of
black hole... The hole came nearer and nearer, and as it
swallowed her up, she lost consciousness.
    She came to, much, much later it seemed, at the sound
of the Doctor's voice. `Jo! Come on, wake up. Jo--can you
hear me?' Slowly she opened her eyes, and to her enormous
relief saw the Doctor looking down at her. She managed a
nod, and a weak smile. If the Doctor was with her, things
couldn't be so bad after all. He helped her to sit up, and she
looked around. Stretching as far as she could see was a sort
of plain of dunes, dull grey in colour, bleak, desolate and
lifeless. The sky was a threatening purple, and everything
about the place seemed somehow horribly wrong. Jo
realised that it was completely and utterly silent. No wind-
noise, no bird-song--just a dead, sinister calm.
    She struggled to her feet, shivering. `Doctor, where are
we? Why is everything so strange?' A new terror struck
her. Wasn't there a place called Limbo, a featureless
nowhere between Heaven and Hell? `Doctor, we're not--
dead, are we?'
    The Doctor's familiar laugh broke the deadly silence
like a breath of normality. `Not a bit of it! This is a place. A
singularly unpleasant place, but a place all the same. And
we've been brought here. Let's take a look around, shall
we?'
    The two lonely figures started trudging across the
featureless grey landscape. They climbed a grey dune and
looked around. Before them stretched an endless sea of
more dunes, more hollows.
   Suddenly Jo pointed. `Doctor, look!' Standing
incongruously in the next hollow was a green painted filing
cabinet. `That's ours,' said Jo almost indignantly. `It used
to be in the laboratory.'
   The Doctor nodded. `So it did. But then, so did we! It
was brought here, exactly as we were.'
   They trudged on. Soon they came across more odds and
ends of UNIT furniture, a laboratory bench, stools, even a
hat-stand, all dotted at random around the grey dunes. The
Doctor climbed another dune and gave a yell of delight.
`Jo, come and see!' Jo ran up to join him. There in the
hollow beneath them was `Bessie', sedately parked as if
ready for a day's outing. They ran towards her. Somehow
the sight of the little car was immensely cheering. The
Doctor gave it a pat on the bonnet. `You see, Jo? We've
been transported like "Bessie" and all that other stuff. Now
all we have to do is find out where Here is, and Who
brought us.'
   Jo climbed into the passenger seat. `Come along then,
Doctor. No point in walking if we don't have to.'
   The Doctor looked at her dubiously. `Use "Bessie"?
Well, we can try. I'm not sure if mechanical laws apply in a
place like this.' He pressed the starter, and the engine
turned over immediately. The Doctor grinned. `Bless my
soul!' He turned to Jo and said in a chauffeur's voice,
`Where to, miss?'
   Jo smiled, and waved airily. `Just drive around, my good
man!'
   And drive around they did. `Bessie' climbed valiantly up
the low hills, and lurched down into the hollows. It was
better riding than walking, but they soon began to feel that
they weren't achieving much. Since everywhere was so
exactly the same, there seemed little point in moving at all.
The Doctor halted the car on top of one of the higher
dunes. Jo stood up and looked around. The view in every
direction was exactly the same. `Oh what's the use,' she
sighed. `We could wander round here for ever--there's
nothing to see.'
   `Oh yes there is,' said the Doctor suddenly. `Look!' He
pointed. Halfway up the side of one of the dunes a line of
footprints began. They led over the top of the dune and out
of sight. The Doctor climbed out of the car. `Come on, Jo.
We'll follow them on foot. Better get a look at whatever it
is before it sees us.'
   They followed the trail of the footprints up the dune
down the other side, and then over the next dune.
Suddenly the Doctor stopped. `Listen, Jo.' From the other
side of the dune was coming a low, obsessive muttering.
The Doctor motioned Jo onwards and they followed the
footsteps towards the source of the sound. As they came
closer, Jo could hear what the voice was saying. It was
talking to itself in a quiet, reasonable tone.
   `E = MC2. I mean, there's no doubt about that, is there?
But if you equate gravitation with acceleration, I must have
travelled here faster than light. And that's impossible, by
definition.'
   Jo and the Doctor peered over the top of the dune.
Stretching ahead of them was a sea, a dull grey sea that was
hard to distinguish from the land. And sitting cross-legged
on the shore, idly tossing pebbles into the water, was a
short sturdy figure, talking to himself in a steady,
reasonable monotone.
   It was Doctor Tyler, the man who had started the whole
thing when he brought them his orange-coloured box.
   Excitedly Jo called, `Doctor Tyler!' and ran towards
him, the Doctor following close behind.
   Tyler was almost pathetically glad to see them. Words
poured out of him in a flood. `It's Miss Grant, isn't it--and
the Doctor? How did you get here? Same as me, I suppose.
I was in your lab, and I'd just developed that plate, then--
bingo! Fascinating place this. Lonely though. And quiet!
I've been talking to myself, just to hear a human voice. I
don't suppose you know where we are, Doctor?' he ended
hopefully.
    The Doctor rubbed his chin. `Well, only in a general
way. We're at the other end of your streak of space-
lightning, transported through a black hole. We're in a
stable world in a Universe of anti-matter. An anomaly
within an impossibility.'
    `Oh yes?' said Jo faintly.
    Tyler grinned. `What the Doctor means is that a place
like this shouldn't exist in a cosmos like this, and even if it
does, we shouldn't be here anyway. Right, Doctor?'
    `Well--something like that. But we are here.
Kidnapped--and marooned.'
    Tyler nodded, his face grave. `Aye--and who by, that's
what I want to know.' He looked round cautiously.
`There's things here, you know, Creatures.'
    Instinctively Jo drew closer to the Doctor. `What kind
of--things?' she asked nervously.
    Tyler drew a deep breath. `Well, they're man-shaped. In
a nasty, blobby sort of way, that is. Made of some sort of
jelly stuff. I've seen 'em moving about. Managed to dodge
'em so far though. They seem to be searching.'
    Jo tugged at the Doctor's sleeve. `Those things that
attacked UNIT...'
    The Doctor nodded. `We've encountered them too,
Doctor Tyler. They seem to be servants of whoever's
behind all this. They were searching, you say? Probably for
us!'
    `I think they've found us, Doctor,' said Jo.
    The Doctor and Tyler looked up. The dunes above
them were lined with the blobby figures, motionless and
waiting. Instinctively the Doctor shouted, `Run, all of you!'
    Before they could move, one of the figures raised a
shapeless hand, and the ground exploded at their feet.
They ran the other way, and more explosions sprang up to
bar their path. Soon they were held, trapped, in a circle of
flames. They stood helplessly, waiting, as the hideous,
shapeless creatures shambled closer.

Once again the President and the Chancellor stood in the
Temporal Control Room, watching the screen which
showed the picture of the black hole in space. It seemed
larger, deeper now, as if preparing to swallow up the whole
of the Universe.
    The President said, `It grows more powerful moment by
moment. It swallows up all the energy we can send against
it, draining away our very life.'
    The Chancellor returned to his grievance. `Yet you still
waste the little power that remains to us with this
ridiculous operation of yours concerning the Doctor. Not
only that, you transgress the First Law of Time.'
    The President sighed. Still this niggling insistence on
rules, while everything was crashing around them.
    `In such an emergency, my lord Chancellor,' he began.
    `No emergency can justify such transgression. The
operation must cease.'
    In tones equally determined the President countered,
`The operation must continue. It is now our only hope. We
can do nothing for ourselves but hold off the disaster a very
little longer. The Doctor has gone to the source of the evil.
Perhaps there he can...'
    `The source?' interrupted the Chancellor sharply. `How
is that possible? What is the Doctor's current situation?'
    The President smiled wryly. `It depends which Doctor
you mean. The earliest incarnation, the oldest can do no
more than advise. The power was too low for a full
incarnation. The second is still on Earth, assisting with the
situation there.'
    `And the third?'
    `He has allowed himself to be transported through the
black hole, to fight the evil at its source.'
    The Chancellor looked at the screen again, at the gaping
black mouth that threatened to swallow the stars. He
turned back to the President, a gleam of triumph in his
eyes. `He has gone--there? Through the black hole?
Beyond the Absolute Event horizon, where the laws of
science no longer apply?'
   Grimly the President nodded.
   The Chancellor said, `Then your rash experiment has
already failed. The Doctor is dead!'
                       5
           A Shock for the Brigadier
Doctor Two carefully adjusted the last of a series of
reflectors and focused it on the blob. It was now ringed by
a circle of reflectors, each one connected to the amazing
conglomeration of electronic equipment the Doctor had
assembled. It was obviously some kind of force-field
generator, thought Benton, though how it worked, and
what it did, he couldn't begin to guess. Doctor Two
plugged the whole thing into one of the special heavy-duty
wall-plugs, and threw a switch. Immediately, fierce blue
electric sparks leaped between all the generators. The blob
was literally ringed with fire. It thrashed wildly for a
moment, and extruded a tentacle. As it touched one of the
sparks, the tentacle whipped back, and the blob crackled,
almost with a note of pain.
   `Sorry, old chap,' said Doctor Two seriously, `but we
can't have you wandering about.'
   Benton felt no such sympathy. `Can't you step up the
power, Doctor? Fry the wretched stuff once and for all?'
   `Certainly not. What would we learn from that?' Benton
privately thought they might not learn much but he for
one would feel a good deal safer.
   The Brigadier came in and looked at the Doctor's work
approvingly.
   `Got it pinned down, eh, Doctor? Well done. I've
another little job for you now.'
   Doctor Two looked at him suspiciously. `Oh yes?'
   `Chap from the Government has turned up. Wants a full
explanation of what's been going on.' The Brigadier
coughed. `I'm leaving it all to you.'
   `All right. But won't he think it strange--seeing me, I
mean?'
   `I've explained all that. You're the Doctor's assistant.'
    The second Doctor drew himself up to his full height,
such as it was, and said indignantly, `Now see here,
Brigadier...'
    The Brigadier held up his hand. `No use fussing,
Doctor. The truth would be too much for him. Assistant it
will have to be.' He held open the door. `Come along now.'
    Doctor Two hovered indecisively. `But I've just set up
my apparatus. I'll be able to confuse the stuff now.'
    `No doubt,' remarked the Brigadier drily. `Confusion
seems to be your forte. But that will have to wait. You're
sure that stuff's safe now?'
    `Oh yes. We've got it thoroughly tamed, haven't we,
Sergeant?'
    Benton nodded, a little dubiously. The Brigadier turned
to him, `In that case you'd better stay here and keep an eye
on it, Benton.'
    Benton nodded, resignedly. `Yes, sir.' He'd expected
something like that.
    The second Doctor pressed a remote-control dial into
Benton's reluctant hand. `You'll need this, old chap. You
see, it's graded, 0 to 100.' Doctor Two turned a little dial,
and Benton saw the figures on the indicator change from
50 to 51, 52... `0 would set the thing free--100 would
destroy it. Keep the setting in the middle range and you'll
be all right.'
    The Brigadier bustled the second Doctor out of the
laboratory, and Benton was left alone with the blob. He
had developed an almost personal hatred for it and he
walked round it, surveying it dubiously. It had reverted to
its original size, about that of a large football. It heaved and
quivered and crackled faintly. Benton couldn't rid himself
of the feeling that it was watching him, waiting its chance.
He glared at it threateningly and said seriously, `Just you
watch it, mate. If you so much as twitch at me, you'll get
the works.'
    The blob seemed to quiver and pulsate with rage. It gave
an angry crackle, as if in reply to his threat. `Right,' said
Benton sternly, and turned up the dial on the remote-
control unit. 53, 54, 55... The blob quivered even more
fiercely. To Benton's horror it started to grow. In a matter
of minutes, it had doubled in size. Benton twisted the dial
frantically, sending the reading up into the 60s, 70s, 80s,
90s... Fierce blue sparks from the reflectors blazed all
round the blob, but they seemed only to encourage it. It
grew larger still. Now the dial was at 100, and still the
thing grew. It crashed its way free of the reflectors and
lurched towards Benton. He retreated into a corner yelling,
`Doctor, Brigadier, come back.'
   The Doctor, who was having a very unsatisfactory
conversation with a sceptical Government V.I.P. in the
Brigadier's office, heard the shouts and ran straight out of
the room. With a look of mute apology, the Brigadier
followed. The V.I.P. was extremely indignant, and decided
to turn in an unfavourable report on the Brigadier as soon
as possible.
   When Doctor Two ran into the laboratory, the Brigadier
close behind him, the jelly-blob had Benton cornered, and
was stretching out a menacing tentacle. As soon as the
second Doctor entered it turned away from Benton and
started menacing him. Cautiously he backed away. The
blob pursued him, hissing and crackling.
   Benton seized his chance, ducked out of his corner, and
slipped past the blob to join the others. All three made for
the door, but the blob anticipated their move, flowing
swiftly across the doorway to cut off their retreat.
   His eyes fixed on the blob, Doctor Two edged towards
the TARDIS. He produced his key and quickly opened the
door. `Inside, both of you!'
   `Oh no, you don't get me in your box of tricks,' said the
Brigadier firmly. Not bothering to argue, Doctor Two
grabbed him, and with a show of surprising strength
virtually threw him inside. Benton followed and the
Doctor ducked inside the TARDIS just as the jelly lashed
out menacingly.
     He shot across to the console, closed the door and
muttering `Force-field, force-field, force-field,' started the
TARDIS ticking over. Then he collapsed against the
console with a sigh of relief. (So frantically had he been
rushing to get the force-field working, that he failed to
notice when his beloved flute dropped from the top pocket
of his coat, rolled across the console, and dropped
somewhere inside the inner workings of the TARDIS.)
     Doctor Two switched on the scanner, and he and
Benton watched the blob, now swollen to such an
enormous size that it almost filled the laboratory. `I did
what you said, Doc,' Benton said reproachfully. `But it only
made the thing worse. Seemed to make it stronger, not
weaker.'
     The Doctor wrinkled his brow and scratched his head.
Suddenly he slapped his brow in a gesture of despair. `Of
course! We were dealing with anti-matter. All my
calculations should have been reversed. We weren't
calming it--we were stimulating it!'
     The Brigadier was staring around him with an air of
polite interest. `Do you know, Doctor,' he said suddenly,
`this thing seems to be bigger on the inside than on the
outside?'
     `Well, I had noticed. You see it's dimensionally
transcendental and--'
     `Never mind your scientific mumbo jumbo, Doctor.
Some kind of optical illusion,' the Brigadier said shrewdly.
`All done with mirrors, I dare say.'
     The Doctor was searching his pockets. `You haven't
seen my flute anywhere, have you?'
     `What are you talking about, Doctor?'
     `My flute--wooden thing about so long, with holes in
it.'
     `Never mind your wretched flute. Let me out of this
contraption.'
     `I'm afraid I can't do that. You'd never make it across
the room.'
   He pointed to the scanner screen. The entire laboratory
was filled with a vast pulsating mass of jelly, which was
beginning to flow out into the corridors.
   The Brigadier was frantic. `Doctor, you've got to let me
out. I must warn the men.'
   Doctor Two shook his head. `I'm sorry, it's impossible.'
   Benton produced his walkie-talkie. `Why don't you call
them up on this, sir?'
   Somewhat annoyed that he hadn't thought of this
himself, the Brigadier took the set from Benton and
snapped, `This is the Brigadier. Does anyone read me?'
   There came an answering crackle and a voice said,
`Communications room here, sir. Corporal Palmer. Where
are you, sir?' There was a note of panic in the voice as it
went on, `Sir, that jelly stuff's on the move again. It seems
to be filling the entire building. What do we do?'
   `Evacuate,' ordered the Brigadier. `Everybody outside, a
safe distance from the building. Form up on the hill, and
wait further instructions. Brigadier out. Oh, just a minute.'
   `Sir?'
   `See that chap from Whitehall gets away safely, will you?
Make my apologies and tell him our appointment will have
to be unavoidably postponed.' The Brigadier switched off
the walkie-talkie. `Well, Doctor, what next?'
   The Doctor was still fishing round in his many pockets.
`We sit, and wait and think, I'm afraid. Would you care for
a gobstopper?'
   He produced a grimy paper bag, offered it to
theBrigadier (who rejected it rather irritably) and said, `I
wish I could find my flute. I think best to music.'
   Benton, who was still watching the scanner screen, said,
`Doctor, the picture's changing. It's that old bloke again.'
   Doctor Two rushed to the screen and saw the features of
his first incarnation glaring at him disapprovingly. `Well,'
said the sharp old voice, `made any progress?'
   Doctor Two sighed, and decided to own up. After all if
you can't be honest with yourself... `No,' he said firmly.
`None whatsoever. How are our fellow Time Lords?'
   `Getting steadily weaker. They can't seem to check the
energy loss.'
   `Is there anything I can do to help? I'd welcome your
advice.'
   `Turn off the TARDIS force-field.'
   Doctor Two looked horrified. `But that would mean--'
   `Well of course it would,' interrupted the old Doctor
querulously. `But I'm afraid it may be the only way. Surely
you can see that? Use our intelligence!' And with that, the
lined old face faded away. The rampaging jelly-blob filled
the scanner once again.
   The second Doctor stood slumped by the scanner, his
face grave and resigned. Benton said, `You're not going to
do it, are you, Doctor--turn off the force-field?'
   `Oh yes, I think so.' He nodded towards the scanner. `He
told me to. And I've always had great respect for his
advice.'
   The Brigadier looked at him in perplexity. `Am I correct
in thinking, Doctor, that if you cut off the force-field, that
stuff out there can get at the TARDIS?'
   Doctor Two said cheerfully, `Absolutely correct. Hold
on, everyone!' Before they could stop him, he reached out
and switched off the force-field.
   Immediately a series of tremendous jolts started to
shake the TARDIS, sending it lurching from side to side.
There was a final tremendous jolt, and the TARDIS
seemed to spin in mid-air, throwing its occupants about
like dice inside a shaker. They crashed against walls, floors
and ceiling, and everything went black.

Corporal Palmer had received the Brigadier's order to
evacuate with the greatest relief. He lost no time in
carrying it out. For the second time that day the UNIT
H.Q. staff poured out of the building at top speed, forming
up on the overlooking hill. A very angry Whitehall V.I.P.
had been whizzed back to London in his limousine, and
now Palmer and the rest of the UNIT troops were
watching the main building, wondering what would
happen next. Palmer thought he was prepared for
anything. But he was wrong. The jelly-like substance, now
swollen to fantastic volume, could be seen pouring through
the empty building. Empty that is, except for those trapped
inside the TARDIS. Soon every room in the building was
filled with the heaving, crackling mass. The stuff was even
rising outside the outer walls, until the outlines of the
entire building were obscured by the glistening blob.
    Palmer made another attempt to get through on his
walkie-talkie. `Brigadier, this is Corporal Palmer. The
evacuation is now complete. Are you still all right? Shall
we mount a rescue attempt?'
    There was no reply. Suddenly an enormous white flash
filled the air. Palmer dropped his walkie-talkie and, like
the rest of the UNIT troops, covered his eyes with his
hands. For one terrible moment, he thought they had all
been blinded. He opened his eyes and saw--blackness.
Then to his infinite relief, the blackness gave way to a kind
of red mist. This too faded and restored more or less
normal vision, though everything seemed very blurred.
Blinking his eyes, Palmer looked at UNIT H.Q. It was
gone.
    He rubbed his streaming eyes with his fists and looked
again. The entire building had disappeared. Even the
foundations were gone. All that was left was a huge
rectangular patch of black earth where the building had
once stood. Unbelievingly, Palmer stumbled towards it.

Inside the TARDIS it was Doctor Two who recovered
consciousness first. He found himself slumped over the top
of the control console. He slid down, groaning a little from
aches and stiffness, and felt himself rapidly all over,
concluding with relief that although most of him was
bruised, nothing was actually broken. He thought that it
was probably the shock of transportation, rather than the
banging about, which had knocked them all out.
    Sergeant Benton was sprawled in a heap on the base of
the console, the Brigadier slumped face down near the
door. The Doctor looked at them sadly, wondering how to
break the news. The first thing, he decided, was to wake
them up.
    A few minutes later, the Brigadier and Sergeant Benton
were both on their feet, stretching and groaning, and
gazing around in confusion. The Doctor checked them
over and decided that, like himself, they were more shaken
up than actually damaged.
    As soon as he was fully conscious, the Brigadier's first
thought was for the safety of his men. He snatched up the
walkie-talkie, which was lying in a corner, and flicked the
control. `Corporal Palmer, do you read me? Palmer, what's
the situation out there?' The set crackled, but there was no
reply. The Brigadier shook it irritably. `Must have been
damaged in the explosion.'
    Doctor Two looked at him sadly. `I'm afraid you won't
get through on that thing, Brigadier. It hasn't quite got the
range. And that wasn't an explosion--not in the way you
mean.'
    `Nonsense. I know blast-effect when I feel it. That jelly
stuff must have blown itself up. Maybe that contraption of
yours did the job after all, Doctor. Switch on that scanner
thing.'
    Silently Doctor Two obeyed. The scanner showed an
empty laboratory, with no sign of the blob. `There you are,'
said the Brigadier triumphantly. `We've got rid of it.'
    `On the contrary, Brigadier, it's got rid of us.'
    The Brigadier ignored him. `Open the doors now please.
I'll just pop outside and see what's going on.'
    `I really don't advise it.'
    `Come now, Doctor, we can't stay inside here for ever.'
    `No, I suppose we can't. Very well, I'll open the doors.
But I think you should prepare yourself for a bit of a
shock.'
   He operated the control, the TARDIS door opened and
the Brigadier marched purposefully out.
   Doctor Two called after him, `Brigadier, wait.. But the
Brigadier was gone. He sighed, `Oh dear, oh dear, I do wish
he'd listen. Come along, Sergeant Benton, we'd better get
after him.'
   They followed into the laboratory, but the impatient
Brigadier had already moved on. Doctor Two looked
around almost admiringly. `Most ingenious. I suppose the
stuff found the TARDIS a bit indigestible by itself, so it
swallowed some of the surrounding matter as well. Like
washing down a pill with a swig of water.'
   `What are you on about, Doc?' said Benton suspiciously.
`Are you trying to tell me the whole place has moved?'
   `That's right.'
   `Where are we then?'
   Doctor Two nodded towards the direction taken by the
departed Brigadier. `Not where he thinks we are.'
   The Brigadier marched along the empty, silent
corridors, pleased to see that the evacuation had been
carried out as ordered. Curious how quiet everything was.
He was on his way to the front door. From there he would
be able to see Corporal Palmer on the hill, signal they were
all safe. The Brigadier reached the main door and flung it
open. He opened his mouth to call, but no sound came out.
   There was no green hill, no Corporal Palmer, no UNIT
troops to be seen. No roads, no buildings, no fields, no
trees. Just miles of grey dunes, stretching ahead as far as
the eye could see.
                      6
          In the Hands of the Enemy
Herded by the circle of blobby figures, the Doctor, Jo and
Tyler trudged wearily across the endless grey landscape.
Their guards herded them like sheep-dogs. If they strayed
from the right path, the ground erupted in flame before
their feet. There was never any doubt as to which way they
were intended to go.
   Jo was almost dropping with weariness. She felt as if the
nightmare journey had gone on forever. The ghastly
sameness of the featureless dunes meant that they didn't
even feel they were getting anywhere. It was like walking
endlessly on the spot in some terrible dream. Jo stumbled,
and held the Doctor's arm for support. `I can't keep this up
much longer, Doctor.'
   Gently he steadied her on her feet. `You won't have to. I
think we've reached our destination.'
   For quite some time, Jo simply hadn't bothered to look
around her. Since there was nothing to see, she'd simply
watched her own feet stumbling through the grey sand.
Wearily she lifted her head and followed the direction of
the Doctor's pointing finger. She gave a gasp of surprise.
   In front of them the grey desert had levelled out, and
there, in the middle distance, stood a towering castle. It
seemed to have been beaten from solid brass. Hundreds of
towers and slender minarets glinted dully beneath the
lowering purple sky, giving the whole place a look of
oriental opulence, like the Arabian Nights castle of some
Caliph. The massive main gates were open. Inside they
could see only blackness.
   Jo clutched the Doctor's arm. `We haven't got to go in
there, have we?'
   The Doctor took a step to one side, and a burst of flame
sent him back on the road to the castle. `I'm afraid there's
no alternative,' he said gently. `And it would be very rude
to keep our host waiting.'
   Tyler looked up at the gleaming, sinister castle.
`Whoever he is, I don't reckon much to his taste in
architecture,' he grunted. Soon all three of them were
trudging through the massive brazen gates into the
darkness of the castle beyond.
   They found themselves in a vast shadowy hall. On every
side parabolic arches stretched up to the impossibly distant
ceiling. With a clang that made Jo jump, the gates swung to
behind them.
   `What now?' whispered Tyler.
   The Doctor spoke in his normal voice. `I've no idea,' he
said. `I expect someone will let us know.'
   `GREETINGS!'
   The single word, spoken in a deep resonant voice,
echoed and resounded around the hall. They looked
towards the source. At the end of the hall, framed in a
patch of brilliant light (like a Superstar in a spot-light,
thought Jo irreverently), stood a huge, imposing figure. It
was a good seven feet tall, and it wore long metallic robes
that reflected the gleaming bronze of the walls. It was
crowned with a terrifying brazen mask, a huge, cruel metal
face with long slanting eye-slits. With a shudder of horror,
Jo saw that behind the eye-slits there was--nothing. Only
blackness.
   `Our host, I presume,' murmured the Doctor and began
walking towards the patch of light. Reluctantly, the others
followed.
   The Doctor gazed up at the terrifying figure, made
larger still by the raised metal dais on which it stood. `Who
are you?' he asked boldly. `Why did you bring us here?'
   There was a moment's pause, then the great booming
voice spoke again. `My purpose will soon be revealed to
you, Time Lord. As for my name--in the legends of our
people, I am known as Omega.' The clanging syllables of
the name ran round the great brazen hall, until their
echoes died away in the high vaulted ceiling.
    Jo looked up at the Doctor. It was all too obvious that
the name meant a great deal to him. She had never seen
him look so shocked. In an awe-stricken voice he gasped,
`No--no you can't be. You were destroyed.'
    `No, Doctor, as you see, I was not destroyed.' A note of
strangely incongruous self-pity came into the great voice. `I
have been wronged, Doctor, grievously wronged. Now is
the time for my vengeance.'
    At a wave of Omega's hand, blob-men appeared from
the darkness and began to herd Jo and Tyler away. The
Doctor called, `My friends must not be harmed, Omega.
They are here by chance.'
    `Do not fear, Doctor.' With a rather sinister emphasis,
Omega added, `They have no part in my coming
vengeance.'
    Jo and Tyler were driven down a long gloomy corridor.
Their guard paused by a sort of arched recess, and
motioned them in. Once they were inside, it moved away
into the darkness. Tyler looked round puzzled. `How do
they expect to keep us here, in a cell with no door?'
    His question was soon answered. The air at the mouth
of the arch shimmered and another wall appeared,
blocking it off. Jo drew a deep breath. `How about that,
then?'
    `Aye, he's got a few tricks up his sleeves,' agreed Tyler.
`Whoever he is.'
    Jo was still thinking about their encounter with Omega.
`The Doctor seemed to know him.'
    Tyler grunted. `Happened he did. Hasn't done us much
good though, has it? We're shut up in here, while the
Doctor has a nice cosy chat with his old friend.'
    `I didn't get the feeling they were friends. More like
deadly enemies.' Folding her arms, she leaned against the
bare metal walls of the cell and shivered. One thought was
filling her mind. It was the first time she had ever seen the
Doctor afraid.
The Doctor was still afraid, as anyone may be who finds
himself face to face with a legend. But he managed to
control his fear, keeping his voice steady and his manner
calm. Once Jo and Tyler had been taken off, Omega had
motioned the Doctor to follow him. Now they were
standing in some kind of inner chamber, just behind the
great hall. There was still the same richly ornate metallic
decor, but one complete wall was occupied by an enormous
screen showing a great sweep of space, crowded with a sort
of faint starry mist. The Doctor knew he was looking at the
Veil Nebula, an enormous mass of gases and cosmic dust.
Omega gestured towards it. `Without me, there would be no
Time Travel. You and your fellow Time Lords would still
be locked into your own Time, as puny as the creatures you
so graciously protect.'
   The Doctor was all too aware that everything Omega
claimed was true. Lamely he said, `You must have known
that your mission was dangerous.'
   `Dangerous, yes. Yet I completed it. And I did not
expect to be abandoned.'
   `You were not abandoned, Omega,' said the Doctor
desperately.
   The great booming voice overbore him. Again Omega
gestured towards the Nebula. `Once all this was a star, a
sun with planets, until I arranged its detonation.'
   `You were the first of our Solar Engineers. It was your
duty...'
   `It was my honour. I was to be the one to find and create
the power source to give my people mastery over Time
itself.'
   `And so you did. You succeeded and you were honoured
for it.'
   `Honoured? I was abandoned. I was the sacrifice to that
supernova. Blown out of existence into this world of anti-
matter. My brothers became Time Lords, and I was
abandoned to my fate, forgotten...' Once more the great
voice was steeped in self-pity.
   `You were not forgotten,' contradicted the Doctor firmly.
`All my life I have known of you, honoured you as the
greatest of our heroes. Now you have turned against your
own people, you talk of revenge...'
   Omega made a sweeping gesture, and the picture
disappeared from the screen. `And why not? A hero?' This
time the voice was full of bitter scorn. `I should have been a
god!'
   Omega turned and strode away. The Doctor followed
him, his mind a whirlpool of emotions. On one level, he
was still reeling from the shock of realising that the long-
dead Omega, the great Solar Engineer who had sacrificed
his life to bring the secret of Time Travel to his people,
was somehow still alive in this impossible place. But at the
forefront of his mind was another terrifying thought. One
thing was quite certain. Brooding on his wrongs for untold
years had sent Omega mad. Yet in this world he was all
powerful. And the Doctor and his friends were in Omega's
hands. For the first time in his life, the Doctor knew the
full meaning of despair.
   He followed Omega into the great hall. For the moment
Omega's rage had subsided, and the great figure was
wrapped in a brooding silence.
   The Doctor said, `Theoretically, of course, you, this
place, that substance of yours--well, it's all impossible.'
   `Here, Doctor, everything is possible--as you will
discover.'
   `How did you manage to survive?'
   `How does anyone survive? By the force of my will!'
   `And the organism you sent to bring us here?'
   `I created it from the raw stuff of matter. It has
transformed you, so that you too can exist in this world.'
   With complete sincerity, the Doctor said, `It's all
enormously impressive. With all these powers, why do you
need help from me?'
   `There are some things even I cannot do alone. At this
point in my plans, I need the help of a brother Time Lord.'
There was a wealth of scorn in Omega's voice as he
pronounced the last few words.
   `I see. And since I was isolated on Earth, you turned
your attack to me.'
   Omega waved a dismissive hand. `It amused me--to use
you against them.'
   `Even if I give you my help, do you really think you can
succeed in defeating the other Time Lords--all of them?'
   Omega's laugh echoed round the hall. `But I am
defeating them. With the forces at my command, I created
the black hole. It is draining cosmic energy from their
universe into mine. As they grow weaker, I grow stronger.'
   `And if I don't co-operate?'
   The room darkened. Streaks of jagged light flashed like
lightning across the darkness of the roof. The metal walls
glowed with an evil fire. `Then you will face the wrath of
Omega,' the great voice roared. `You and the miserable
humans who accompany you here. Do you value their lives,
Doctor? Do you value your own?' With a shock of surprise,
the Doctor realised that Omega's surroundings were
affected by his moods. Instinctively he knew this was a
valuable clue to the workings of this strange world.
   A panel in the wall near Omega suddenly lit up, and
complex symbols streaked across it. Meaningless to the
Doctor, it was obvious they conveyed some message to
Omega. Abruptly he said, `Investigate and follow. Bring
them to me--but do not harm them.' Turning to the
Doctor, Omega went on ironically, `You are more fortunate
than I, Doctor. You have just arrived on my world--yet
already you have human company to share your exile.'

The Brigadier spent a moment taking in the incredibly
strange panorama that stretched before him. Then he
straightened himself up, slammed the main door and
marched back to the laboratory. Benton was standing by
the TARDIS calling, `Will you please hurry, Doctor?'
   The Brigadier added his voice to the demand. `Doctor,
come out here at once!'
    Doctor Two popped his head out of the TARDIS. `I'm
just trying to find my flute,' he said peevishly.
    The Brigadier was in no mood to discuss flutes. `Now
see here, Doctor,' he spluttered, `you have finally gone too
far.'
    The Doctor chuckled at some private joke. `I think we
all have. What's it like out there?'
    `There's sand everywhere,' said the Brigadier
indignantly. `Nasty grey sand. We're in some kind of
quarry. Do you realise what you've done, Doctor--you've
stolen the whole of UNIT H.Q.'
    `It's no use blaming me. I tried to warn you.'
    `What am I going to tell Geneva?' demanded the
Brigadier. `We're probably miles from London.'
    `We are indeed,' muttered Doctor Two. `Light-years,
more like it!'
    The Brigadier wasn't listening. `Tell you what, you two
stay here and keep an eye on the place. I'll pop out and find
out where we are. Back in a jiffy.'
    Before they could stop him the Brigadier was off again.
    `Oh dear,' said Doctor Two. `Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear!'
    Benton sighed. `We'd better go after him you know,
Doc.'
    `I suppose you're right,' agreed Doctor Two. `Hang on a
moment, I'll just have another quick look for my flute.'
    Before Benton could stop him, he popped back inside
the TARDIS.
    It was quite a time before he finally emerged, despite
numerous appeals from Benton. When he did finally
appear he was still sulking because he hadn't been able to
find it.
    `Never mind your flipping flute, Doctor,' said Benton
forcefully. `What about catching up with the poor old
Brig?'
    `All right, all right, I'm coming,' grumbled the Doctor.
He and Benton walked along the silent corridors, opened
the main doors, and stepped out. They saw the same
panorama of grey sands that had greeted the Brigadier. But
there was one difference. The building was surrounded by
the blob-men. The faceless servants of Omega had come to
fetch them.
                         7
                 Door to Freedom
The Brigadier strode briskly across the dunes, trying to
persuade himself that UNIT H.Q. had merely transported
to some lonely part of Norfolk on a very nasty day. He
wasn't having much success. They didn't have dull grey
sand in Norfolk, as far as he knew. Or a permanently
purple sky. Or a strange eerie quality of light, and an
uncanny silence. Slowly he was being forced to accept that
he'd travelled a very long way.
   As he trudged along, looking in vain for any sign of life,
the Brigadier gradually became aware that he was being
followed. A shadowy figure was trailing him through the
dunes. The Brigadier drew his revolver. Waiting until a
particularly steep dune loomed ahead, he sprinted round
the base of it, and doubled back in his tracks. Dropping to
the ground, he wriggled up to the top of the dune, and
peered over the top. A figure stood looking ahead,
obviously puzzled by the Brigadier's disappearance. Rising
to his feet the Brigadier aimed his revolver and shouted,
`Raise your hands!' The figure whirled round, and the
Brigadier found himself staring down the muzzle of a
double-barrelled shot-gun.
   The gun was held by a wiry middle-aged man with a
wrinkled weather-beaten face. A country man's face.
   The Brigadier stared at the man. There was something
familiar about him. `Hollis!' he said triumphantly. `You're
Arthur Hollis, the game warden chap. The first one who
disappeared.' He holstered his revolver. `I'm very glad to
see you, Mr. Hollis. Perhaps you can tell me what's going
on here?'
   Hollis gave him a suspicious stare. `Your manoeuvres,
innit? Thought you'd be telling me!'
   `Manoeuvres?'
   Hollis waved an arm. `All this. Box came down, see? I
touched it and--here I am. All different. Only the
Government mucks things about like that.'
   The Brigadier rubbed his forehead, realising that Hollis
thought he was caught up in some kind of military
experiment. `No, Mr Hollis, you've got it all wrong. The
fact of the matter is...' The Brigadier realised that he didn't
actually know what the fact of the matter was himself, and
changed his tack. `I'm just as much in the dark as you are.
All that has happened is the result of some kind of hostile
force.'
   `Oh ah? What force?'
   `We won't go into that now,' said the Brigadier
hurriedly. `Just take my word for it. Tell me everything
you've seen since you've been here.'
   Hollis scratched his head. Self-expression wasn't his
strong point.
   `Well,' he said, with a mightly effort, `there was two
others turned up in a dafty motor, like. Tall white-haired
feller in a fancy get-up, and a tidgy little gel.'
   `The Doctor!' said the Brigadier excitedly. Then he
paused. He'd just left the Doctor, back at the strangely
transplanted UNIT H.Q.
   Could Benton's story be true after all? Were there two
Doctors? Dismissing this problem for the moment he said,
`Go on. What happened to them?'
   `Them blobby things got 'em. Them and another feller.
Didn't get me though. I'm used to moving quiet. I followed
'em see...' Suddenly Hollis broke off, and flung himself
down, motioning to the Brigadier to do the same. They
wriggled round the side of the dune, and Hollis pointed.
`That's them. That's what I meant.'
   The Brigadier saw the Doctor--the one he'd left at
UNIT H.Q.--and Sergeant Benton. They were being
herded along like sheep, surrounded by a circle of the
blobby creatures. The Brigadier realised that if he hadn't
gone off and got involved with stalking Hollis, he would
probably have been captured himself. Instinctively he
moved to go to the rescue, but Hollis's hand on his
shoulder pressed him down.
   `Hold on now. No use rushing 'em. I know where
they're bound. We'll follow 'em.'
   Keeping their distance, the Brigadier and Hollis trailed
after the little group. They followed them on the long
journey through the dunes, up to the point where the grey
sand levelled out into a plain. Not daring to leave the
shelter of the dunes, they watched helplessly as the little
party went through the great brass gates which opened at
their approach and clanged shut behind them.
   `Well,' said Hollis. `Now what?'
   For the first time in his life, the Brigadier had a
moment of utter panic. By now he was so disorientated by
the rush of sudden happenings that he simply had no idea
what to do next. Then his instincts and training reasserted
themselves. Whatever mad world he had tumbled into, he
was a military man, and he would react in the correct
military manner. `First we'll do a recce,' he said crisply.
`Then we'll mount a surprise attack. Mr. Hollis, you will
consider yourself under my orders.'
   For a moment Hollis stared at him mutinously. But
back in World War Two, he had been a soldier himself,
and the Brigadier's level stare and clipped voice brought
back long-buried memories. Clumsily he shouldered arms
with his shot-gun and said, `Righto, General!' The
Brigadier nodded and, followed by his one-man army,
began moving cautiously around the castle.

Inside, the Doctor was doing his best to reason with
Omega. He was treading very carefully, more than a little
hindered by his own awe of that legendary figure, very
conscious of the way that Omega's powerful yet unstable
mind could fluctuate between a rather ironic amiability
one minute, and sudden terrifying rage the next.
   `You yourself admit,' the Doctor was saying in his most
persuasive voice, `you cannot always be sure of controlling
the matter-anti-matter reactions. If you find you cannot
reverse the energy drain you have created through the
black hole, the very fabric of the Universe could be torn
apart!'
   Omega's terrifying laugh boomed through the brazen
hall. `What if it does? It will make an interesting spectacle.'
   The Doctor was appalled by the callous egoism of
Omega's response. Desperately he sought for some lever to
move him. `If that happens, then you will be alone forever.'
   The great voice took on a note of sonorous gloom. `I am
used to solitude. If I cannot have my freedom, I shall have
my revenge. I shall be satisfied.'
   The Doctor made a final attempt. `You have been
unjustly treated, greatly provoked. No-one denies that.
Undo the harm you have done and you can resume your
place on the High Council. I will plead for you...'
   The Doctor knew at once that he had made a serious
mistake. The room darkened, thunder rumbled
threateningly round the great hall, as Omega boomed, `You
will plead for me? You would do better to plead with me--
for them.'
   `You could have your freedom again..
   `Power is the only freedom. There will be no bargains
with those who betrayed and deserted me. You are here for
a reason, Doctor... I shall take you to the Flame of
Singularity!'
   The Doctor frowned. Once again this hint that he
featured in Omega's plans. Before he could enquire further,
they were interrupted. The doors clanged open and two
figures entered, one large, one small, herded by a menacing
circle of blob-men. Sergeant Benton, and the Doctor's
other self. With a flash of irritation, the Doctor saw that
the little man was looking round him with cheerful
interest, like a tourist on a sight-seeing trip. Didn't the
fellow take anything seriously? The Doctor found it
difficult to realise that this scruffy, rather comical figure
was an earlier version of himself. He felt this second
Doctor was like a sort of younger brother, with a number
of rather irritating mannerisms that he himself had
outgrown.
   The Doctor and Benton were both tall men, and Omega
topped them by several feet. The unassuming figure of
Doctor Two seemed positively dwarfed by the tall figures
around him. Yet he was studying the huge robed figure of
Omega with interest, peering up into the savage metal
mask with an expression of polite anticipation, like
someone meeting his host at a party.
   There was a note of scorn in Omega's voice. `Who are
you? Why are you here?'
   The Doctor saw Doctor Two about to open his mouth,
and hurriedly answered, `Oh, they're nobody. Probably just
a couple of innocent bystanders, scooped up by that
blundering jelly-organism of yours...'
   `The organism was programmed to seek out a Time
Lord,' said Omega slowly.
   `Well it didn't do very well, did it? Two perfectly
innocent people were transported,' said Doctor Two
cheekily.
   Omega obviously didn't care for any criticism of his
works. `Those were early errors, when the organism was
newly arrived. Later they were corrected.' Omega stared
down at the two new arrivals, and they stared back up at
him. He looked from Benton to the second Doctor. `Can
this be a Time Lord--or this?'
   Doctor Two seemed rather stung by the scorn in
Omega's voice. `Appearances aren't everything, you know,'
he said indignantly.
   `Strange--you do not fear me. Approach!'
   Obediently, Doctor Two walked up to stand beside his
other self. Omega considered them thoughtfully. Both
Doctors could feel the pressure of that enormous
intelligence bearing upon their minds. `Can it be,' the deep
voice rumbled, `two Time Lords? The same Time Lord?
The High Council must be desperate indeed to transgress
their own Time Law.'
   Doctor Two coughed discreetly. `Are you sure you're
not mixing me up with someone else? You see, I'd just
dropped in on some old friends when a horrible great blob
of jelly...'
   Omega's voice broke like a peal of thunder. `Silence,
while I consider this attempt to trick me. I should have
known the High Council would attempt some pathetic
deception. Did they think your two minds would be a
match for mine?' Angrily, Omega began to pace up and
down. `I must decide what shall be your fate!'
   Doctor Two sidled up to his other self and nodded
towards Omega. `Touchy chap, isn't he? I'm afraid I seem
to have upset him!'
   The Doctor looked down at him in despair. `Do you
realise who that is?' Rapidly he explained all he had
learned since his arrival.
   Even Doctor Two seemed impressed. `Omega? Is it
really him? I say!'
   Omega strode back towards them. As if on some
unspoken command, a circle of blob-men stepped from
around the walls and surrounded them. `Take them!
Imprison them with their friends.'
   Doctor Two was again indignant. `Imprison? I say,
that's a bit much. We've only just arrived...'
   `Oh do be quiet!' snapped the Doctor. The blob-men
herded Benton and the two Doctors away. Omega stood
brooding, alone in his great hall.

The Brigadier and Hollis had completed their
reconnaissance, but it had done them little good. A
complete circuit of the castle, most of it wriggling on their
stomachs, had revealed that there was only one way in.
Now they were back at their original vantage point, just in
front of the great brass doors. The Brigadier nodded
towards them. `There's only one thing for it.'
   Hollis looked at him sceptically. `Oh ah?'
   `Take 'em by storm,' said the Brigadier briskly. `Full-
scale frontal attack using all the military resources
available.'
   `And what does that mean?' asked Hollis in his slow
countryman's drawl.
   The Brigadier gave him a rueful grin. As a young
subaltern he had often dreamed of ending gloriously in
some forlorn hope. Now it seemed he was to have his
chance. `That, Mr. Hollis,' he said gently, `means you and
me!'

The bare cell was uncomfortably crowded now. Jo, Tyler,
Sergeant Benton and both Doctors. The atmosphere wasn't
helped by the furious arguments raging between the last
two.
    `I tell you,' the Doctor was saying exasperatedly, `I had a
good chance of winning him over. Then you turned up,
and he started treating me like an impostor.'
    `Well so you are, in a way,' said Doctor Two annoyingly.
He was thoroughly tired of being harangued by this tall,
elegant version of himself. If that's what he was to become,
he thought illogically, he'd sooner stay as he was.
`Although, in another way,' he went on, `we're both
impostors? Or is it neither of us?'
    `Oh do stop wittering on while I'm trying to think,' said
the Doctor.
    Doctor Two glared at him. `There's no need to be so
unpleasant, you know!'
    Jo looked at Benton. `They're getting worse,' she
announced loudly. `They were supposed to help one
another.'
    Benton nodded severely. `That was the idea.'
    A sudden silence fell. The two Doctors looked at one
another rather sheepishly. The Doctor rubbed his chin.
`It's possible I may have spoken a little sharply,' he
announced, looking at no-one in particular.
    Doctor Two said placatingly, `My dear fellow, not a bit
of it.' In fact, as both Doctors were well aware, they were
behaving badly because both were overwhelmed by the
magnitude of the problem facing them, and neither had
any idea what to do about it. In his various incarnations,
the Doctor had found himself up against many terrifying
enemies. With the exception of the Master, this was the
first time he had found himself opposed by a fellow Time
Lord. And in comparison to Omega, the Master shrank
almost to a petty criminal.
    `Er, tell me, old chap,' Doctor Two went on, `what did
you make of him--Omega?'
    `Well, to begin with, I'd say he was confused.'
    Tyler, who had been turning his head from one to the
other of the two Doctors, like a spectator at a tennis match,
said bluntly, `Well, I know I am.' He pointed to Doctor
Two. `Who's he, for a start?'
    `Me,' answered the Doctor simply.
    `Come again?'
    `Oh, ask Jo, there's a good chap.' Turning back to
Doctor Two, he went on, `One minute Omega talks about
his freedom, the next he's threatening universal
destruction. I don't think he knows what he wants.'
    Tyler was not to be put off. `Aye, but what about this
place? I mean, a world of anti-matter, and us in it. How can
it exist?'
    Both Doctors started to speak.
    `The singularity phenomenon, you see..
    `The phenomenon of singularity in fact...'
    Both stopped at exactly the same time. They glared at
each other. `Do go on,' said the Doctor politely. `I'm sure
you understand it far better than I do.'
    `Not at all, old chap. Older and wiser heads, you know...'
    `Doctors!' said Jo severely. `Simple answers please. And
one at a time. Or you can take it in turns.'
    Doctor Two said, `I'm afraid it's not a simple matter, my
dear. But roughly, very roughly, singularity is a--a point in
space-time which can exist only inside a black hole. And
we've come through a black hole into a universe of anti-
matter, close to this state of singularity--where all the
physical laws of the Universe break down completely.
That's how Omega was able to create the world we're in
now, by a fantastic effort of his will.'
   `All that's a gross over-simplification,' said the Doctor
rather unkindly. `But it gives you the general idea.'
   Doctor Two gave him a reproachful look. `Omega has
found a way of controlling singularity, using the vast forces
which exist within this black hole.'
   `Aye,' said Tyler impatiently, `but who is this Omega?
What's he up to?'
   The two Doctors looked at each other. These were
matters they would normally never discuss in the presence
of outsiders. But here, inside the black hole, all normal
laws seemed suspended.
   `Long ago,' began the Doctor, `my race, the Time-Lords,
discovered the secret of Time travel. But to make it work,
we needed a colossal source of energy. Omega provided
that power for us, in an incredible feat of solar engineering.
In the process he was, as we thought, destroyed. Instead he
survived here, in a world he created for himself, in the
universe of anti-matter.'
   Doctor Two added, `We owe him a great debt. His
imprisonment was the price of our freedom to travel in
Time.'
   The Doctor took up the story. `For untold years he was
trapped here, brooding over his wrongs. Then his genius
found a way to strike back at us. He created the light-beam,
used it to send the jelly organism to reach into our world,
started the energy drain from our universe into his.'
   Jo's mind was reeling from the vastness of the concepts
being discussed. It was Sergeant Benton who brought
things back to scale. `Listen,' he said firmly. `I don't follow
a word of all this. But one thing I do understand. This
bloke Omega is up to no good, and you've got to stop him.'
   `The thing is,' interrupted the Doctor gently, `we don't
think we can.'
   Jo was appalled. In all the time she had known the
Doctor, she had never heard him admit defeat. Dimly she
sensed there was something about Omega that seemed
almost to paralyse the Doctor's will. She knew that
somehow she had to give him back his will to fight.
`Nonsense,' she said briskly.
   `But what can we do?' asked the Doctor.
   Sadly, Doctor Two echoed him. `Where can we start?'
   `You can begin by getting us out of here,' said Benton.
   The Doctors looked round the four walls of the cell.
Once again there was no door. The entrance had appeared
when they arrived, and as mysteriously disappeared once
they were inside.
   Jo wrinkled her forehead. `Look if I understood what
you were talking about, this whole world, everything in it,
was sort of thought up, by Omega?'
   Both Doctors nodded.
   `Well, if he can think up a cell, why can't you think up a
door? You're a Time Lord, aren't you? In fact you're two
Time Lords. Surely your wills combined are a match for
his? Why do you think the two of you were sent here?'
   `It might work,' muttered the Doctor.
   `If the combination of wills multiplies, rather than just
doubles,' said Doctor Two excitedly. `Let's try. Contact?'
   `Contact!'
   The two Doctors stared hard at the cell wall. Each in his
mind, which was of course the same mind, formed the
picture of a door. The wall was not blank. There was a
door... a door... a door...
   Jo, Benton and Tyler looked on anxiously. Suddenly,
faintly, there was a door. It grew more and more distinct.
And then it was there--an open door in the hitherto blank
cell wall. Their road to freedom was open.
                        8
               Escape from Omega
Confronted with freedom, everyone realised they had no
very clear idea what to do next. Benton moved towards the
door. `Come on, then, let's get out of here.'
    The Doctors exchanged glances, then nodded; for once
in accord. `You take Jo and Dr. Tyler out of here,' Doctor
Two told Benton. `See if you can get back to the TARDIS
inside UNIT H.Q. We'll meet you there.'
    Jo looked up at them worriedly. `What are you going to
do?'
    Doctor Two gave a determined scowl. `We're going to
do what you suggested, my dear. Look for a way to defeat
Omega.'
    `You see,' said the Doctor, her Doctor, `if our theory's
correct, somewhere in this castle is the actual Point of
Singularity, the centre of all Omega's power. If we can find
it, gain control over it in some way, we'll be able to defeat
him.'
    Jo saw that both Doctors were cheerful again. She had
given them the confidence to escape from the cell. But she
had also inspired them to run into even more danger. She
looked from one to the other, and realised there was no
chance of changing their minds.
    The little party slipped out of the cell, Benton, Tyler
and Jo, turning towards the great hall and the main gates,
while the two Doctors headed the other way, deeper into
the secret recesses of Omega's palace.
    While Benton and his party had simply to try and
retrace their steps, the two Doctors were heading into
completely unknown territory.
    They moved along endless brazen corridors, sometimes
passing through huge vaulted chambers. The whole palace
was empty, echoing, unfinished, as though Omega had
tired of his creation the moment he had thought it into
existence. They had no way of knowing that they were
going in the right direction, yet both felt they knew the
route. Often the corridors divided, but they never had
doubts as to which path to follow. It was as though the
Flame of Singularity was drawing them on.
     Eventually they began to feel a kind of burning glow. It
was like approaching an enormous furnace. They heard a
low, roaring, crackling sound. The heat grew more
intense...
     Then they came to the door. It was not a door in any
ordinary sense. Rather it was a curtain of flame, stretched
across a mighty parabolic arch. The roaring and crackling
sound came from beyond it. They looked at it. They looked
at each other. `Well,' said the Doctor, `I think we've found
it.'
     Doctor Two gave a rueful grin. `I almost wish we
hadn't.'
     `No use just standing here. Someone ought to go in.'
     `Yes, they did, didn't they,' agreed Doctor Two
unenthusiastically. He brightened. `Tell you what, we'll
toss for it.'
     He produced his silver coin, but the Doctor put out a
restraining hand. `Don't bother,' he said wryly. `I
remember we tried that before. Wish me luck!' And with
that the Doctor ducked through the curtain of fire.
     Doctor Two waited, feeling slightly conscience-stricken.
His double-headed Martian Crown had got him out of
many tight spots, but perhaps it was a bit much to play
tricks on himself.
     Suddenly he heard the Doctor's voice. `It's all right.
Come through!'
     Screwing up all his nerve, Doctor Two took a running
jump through the fiery curtain. He was vaguely conscious
that there was almost no sensation of heat. His feet skidded
on the polished brass floor, and the Doctor caught an arm
to steady him. `Just take a look at that, old chap.'
   Doctor Two looked. They were in another of the great
chambers, smaller in diameter than the entrance hall, but
far, far higher. In the centre, an enormous pillar of fire rose
like a colossal fountain, disappearing into the recesses of
the roof. Its ever-changing lights made flickering patterns
on the polished brazen walls. They were at the Flame of
Singularity.
   Both Doctors gazed in awe at the spectacle. They knew
of course that the Point of Singularity wasn't really an
enormous flame. But that was how Omega thought of it,
and in this world of Omega's creation, his thoughts were
real.
   They stood for a long time, hypnotised by the flame. It
seemed almost impertinent to think of taming it, of
bringing it under their control. Suddenly a figure walked
through the curtain of flame behind them.
   Omega stepped forward, towering over them both, and
roared, `I imprisoned you. How is it that you are free?'
   Turning, the two Doctors locked their wills together,
shielding each other from the terrible blast of Omega's
wrath. `We combined our minds against you,' said the
Doctor calmly. `Together we were able to overcome your
barriers. You are not all-powerful, Omega--even in this
world.'
   Doctor Two spoke, and there was nothing comic about
him now. His voice was stern, his manner imposing. `Stop
the energy drain, free us and our friends and we shall plead
with the Time Lords to show you mercy. Otherwise, we
shall combine our wills to destroy you.'
   Omega's angry bellow threatened to shatter the brazen
roof. The colossal flame flickered under his wrath. `You
threaten to destroy me?'
   The Doctor was unimpressed. `If we must, we shall fight
you.'
   Omega's laugh echoed around the room. `You wish to
fight the will of Omega? Then you shall!'
   Suddenly they were--elsewhere. It was not so much that
they moved, as that the room moved from around them.
The Doctor blinked. He was standing alone, in the centre
of an arena, rather like those used for games in the time of
the Caesars. It was surrounded by high stone walls,
unbroken except for a simple viewing stand, a kind of royal
box. There, like some fantastic Roman emperor, stood
Omega. Beside him, unable to move a muscle, was Doctor
Two.
   Overhead was the threatening purple sky of Omega's
planet. Underfoot was the familiar grey sand. Into some
corner of the Doctor's mind came the thought that, with
the chance to invent a world, it was surely a waste of your
opportunities to create such an unattractive one. From
behind the Doctor came a grating sound. He whirled
round. On the far side of the arena a door had opened.
From it shambled--what? You could give it many names,
thought the Doctor, as he backed away. Demon, Ghoul,
Monster. Any of the horrors that rose from the black
depths of the imagination. It was a good eight feet tall,
humanoid in shape, apparently made of some substance
like smooth black granite. The powerful limbs were
knotted with muscle. Hands and feet ended in long evil
talons. Small pointed ears clung to the ape-like head, and
fangs gleamed inside the slavering mouth. The slanted eyes
glowed a fiery red. As the thing came closer, the Doctor
could smell the reek of sulphur on its breath. Suddenly
something about that hideous face struck him as familiar.
In a curious way, it looked like Omega. Naturally enough,
thought the Doctor, since in a sense it was Omega. In this
world Omega's thoughts and feelings were real, and this
ghastly creature was an incarnation of all the rage and
hatred that Omega felt towards the Doctor.
   Gleaming claws hooked at the end of long arms, the
monster shuffled towards the Doctor. He backed further
away, and the creature moved after him with terrifying
speed. The door through which it entered had disappeared,
the walls of the arena were high and smooth. There was no
escape. The monster sprang.
    The Doctor was one of the few two-armed beings to
have mastered the complex art of Venusian Aikido. He
reached for the black shiny limbs, held, twisted, spun, and
the monster flew howling across the arena and slammed
into the steep stone sides. It twisted cat-like to its feet, and
attacked again.
    In the fierce struggle that followed, the Doctor was
under one serious disadvantage. Nothing he did seemed to
harm his opponent in the slightest, but there was no doubt
as to its ability to harm him. Those claws and fangs were
all too real, and if the thing once got a good grip of him, he
would be torn to pieces. A slashing blow missed the
Doctor's throat, but the creature's forearm slammed into
his chest with enough force to send him crashing to the
floor of the arena. The monster pounced, and landed on
the spot where the Doctor had once been, as he rolled
swiftly away.
    From his place beside Omega, Doctor Two watched the
struggle in powerless anguish. Locked in the grip of
Omega's will he was unable to move or speak. He looked
on helplessly as the Doctor ducked, weaved and dodged,
throwing his monstrous opponent time and time again,
only to have it bound back to the attack. Doctor Two could
see that the end was inevitable. Time Lords had immense
strength and endurance, but they are not superhuman or
immortal. They can tire, they can be hurt, and they can
die. Doctor Two wondered what would happen to him if
his other self were to be killed. Presumably he too would
wink out of existence, and cease to be.
    It was obvious that the Doctor was beginning to tire.
His holds and throws were fewer and less successful. Soon
he abandoned retaliation altogether, and concentrated
simply on evading the monster's claws. His foot skidded in
the sand, and the monster was upon him, pinning him to
the ground with its enormous bulk, the clawed hands
digging cruelly into his throat. As the grip tightened, the
Doctor could see only the metal mask of Omega gazing
pitilessly down at him.
   `Destroy him!' Omega roared.
   With a tremendous effort, Doctor Two managed to
speak. `No, Omega, remember why you brought us here--
you need us. If you kill him you destroy your only chance
of freedom. Alone, I cannot help you.'
   There was a long, terrible pause. Omega did not speak
or move. From the arena came choking sounds, and the
exultant howl of the monster.
   Suddenly, monster and arena vanished. Doctor Two
found himself standing at Omega's side by the Flame of
Singularity. The Doctor was on his back, face contorted,
hands still trying desperately to keep the claws of the now-
vanished monster from his throat.
   Realising that the struggle was over, the Doctor got
slowly and painfully to his feet. He straightened his clothes
as best he could, and dusted himself down. He nodded
coolly to Omega. `Thank you. A most interesting
demonstration.' Then he collapsed into Doctor Two's
arms.
   Omega laughed. `See what becomes of those who defy
the will of Omega. Serve me faithfully, Time Lord, if you
would escape the same fate.'
   The unimposing figure of the second Doctor nodded
humbly, as he carefully lowered the Doctor's tall figure to
the floor. `Yes, of course, Omega. Tell us what you want
and we shall obey your commands. But I'm afraid my, er,
friend will need to rest before he is fit to serve you.'
   Omega nodded, then turned away, and disappeared
through the curtain of flame. As he knelt over the slowly
recovering body of his other self, the second Doctor's
usually mild spirit was burning with a savage resolve. They
would destroy Omega if it was the last thing they ever did.
With a sudden rueful grin, he thought that it very probably
would be.
Although they did not know it, the ordeal of the two
Doctors was the salvation of Jo, Benton and Tyler. Almost
the whole of Omega's mind was taken up with the
punishment of those who had dared to defy him, and there
was little of his attention left for the three figures creeping
along the endless metal corridors.
    It was for this reason, the simple absence of Omega's
attention, that the palace seemed so empty and deserted as
they made their way towards the entrance hall. Scarcely
believing their luck, they reached it at last. They could see
the main doors at the far end. Just as they were crossing
the hall, Omega left the Singularity Chamber and returned
his attention to the castle, sensing immediately that the
fugitives were trying to escape. The matter did not concern
him greatly. The humans were of little importance now the
two Time Lords were thoroughly tamed. But it displeased
Omega to be defied, and with an almost careless thought he
despatched his servants to recapture the prisoners. Then he
returned to endless brooding upon his coming revenge.
    With freedom almost theirs, the escaping trio were
horrified to see blob-men running towards them from
every direction. By now they were at the massive doors,
and they began struggling desperately to open them. The
huge metal doors opened inward, and there was no handle
to give them a grip. They scrabbled at the central crack
where the double doors met, but couldn't open them more
than a few inches. The blob-men came nearer and nearer,
their jelly-like surface glistening horribly. Jo felt she would
scream if one of them even touched her. All at once the
doors started to move--not because of their pulling, but
because someone was pushing from the outside. Soon the
gap was big enough and one by one they squeezed through
it, first Jo, then Tyler, then Benton. Outside, they were
astonished and delighted to see the Brigadier, revolver in
hand, backed up by another, smaller man clutching a huge
shot-gun.
    The double doors were closing again of their own
weight as one of the blob-men tried to come through.
Hollis's shot-gun blasted it into glistening fragments, and
before it could reassemble the doors slammed to.
   `Make for the dunes,' urged the Brigadier. `They'll be
after us any moment.' He led them at a brisk jog trot away
from the castle.
   `Excuse me, sir,' panted Benton as he ran up abreast of
him. `How did you know we were trying to get out?'
   The Brigadier chuckled. `We didn't. Saw the doors
moving and decided it was our chance to get in. What
about the Doctor?'
   `Still inside, sir. Told us to make for UNIT H.Q. and
wait there for them.'
   `Them?'
   `There really are two of them, sir, You ask the others.'
   The Brigadier gave him a look, but didn't pursue the
matter.
   `Probably our best plan anyway,' he agreed. `At least we
can have a shot at defending the place.'
   They were in the shelter of the dunes by now, and there
was still no sign of pursuit from the castle. The Brigadier
and Benton paused to allow the others to catch up.
   `Listen,' gasped Jo indignantly, as she puffed up to
them. `We don't have to sprint everywhere like a team of
Olympic athletes. Bessie's here!'
   `The Doctor's car? Where?'
   Jo's face fell. `I'm not sure. Somewhere near the sea,
where we first met Dr. Tyler.'
   Hollis spoke suddenly. `I know it. I was watchin' you.
Just you follow me.'
   He set off across the dunes, and they all followed.
Hollis's countryman's instincts for a landscape seemed to
be in full operation, even in this strange world. He led
them unerringly across the dunes, and in a remarkably
short time they were looking down at the Doctor's car.
   Eagerly, they ran towards it. The Brigadier jumped
behind the wheel, Jo sat beside him, while Benton, Hollis
and Tyler piled in the back. Jo settled down in her seat,
remembering how she and the Doctor had found the little
car, so long ago. She turned to the Brigadier. `Where are we
making for?'
   `UNIT H.Q.,' the Brigadier said cheerfully, as he started
the car. He noticed Jo's astonished reaction and grinned.
`Don't worry, Miss Grant, it's a good deal nearer than you
think.'
   From the back of the car, Benton gave him a respectful
tap on the shoulder. `It may not be too easy to reach
though, all the same, sir.' He pointed. The dunes were
lined with blob-men. One of them raised a shapeless paw,
and the ground exploded in front of the car.
   Once again, the fugitives benefited from the fact that
Omega wasn't giving them his full attention. He had
programmed his servants to recapture them, and left the
matter at that, withdrawing his attention. The blob-men
were programmed to use the simple herding method that
had always before worked with humans. Now, however,
they were after a very different quarry. Thanks to the
Doctor's many improvements, which included a
`Superdrive', `Bessie' was not only a very fast little car, but
a supremely nippy one. She could spin round in her own
length, and hills didn't bother her at all. The Doctor
always said that he could `drive her up the side of a house',
and in the next few minutes the Brigadier came very close
to proving just that.
   Flicking the `Superdrive' switch, stamping down hard
on the accelerator, and spinning the wheel, the Brigadier
whizzed the little car up the side of the dune, weaving to
and fro to dodge the blob-men, and the explosions caused
by their pointing fingers. He was quite accustomed to
remaining cool under fire and the bangs and flashes didn't
bother him at all, especially when he realised that they
were aimed to deter rather than destroy. His passengers
clung on frantically as he dodged their pursuers and
whirled `Bessie' round like a souped-up dodgem car,
avoiding the gesticulating blob-men and the flurry of
explosions. With a final triumphant roar `Bessie' shot clean
over the top of a sand dune and disappeared from sight,
leaving her attackers milling about in hopeless confusion.
   Before very long, the car was drawing up in front of the
UNIT building, which still sat perched incongruously in
the sand. They screeched to a halt, and the Brigadier
jumped out cheerfully. `Enjoyed that. Very pleasant little
drive.'
   For the first time, Jo realised that UNIT H.Q. really was
in Omega's world. `How did that get here,' she gasped.
   `A very good question, Miss Grant,' said the Brigadier.
`We'll discuss it inside.'
   They trooped through the front door, and into the
familiar building. The Brigadier locked and barred the
door behind them and led the way to the Doctor's
laboratory. It still looked bare, since the greater part of its
furniture was distributed over the surrounding dunes, but
the solid blue shape of the TARDIS sat reassuringly in its
usual corner. Jo had assumed they would shelter inside,
but when she tried the door it was locked. The Brigadier
shook his head. `Typical,' he said. `Never mind, we'll do
the best we can with this building.' He produced a set of
keys. `Sergeant Benton--check the armoury. All the heavy
stuff you can find... grenades, bazookas--I think there's an
old Bren-gun in there somewhere.'
   Benton said `Yessir' and rushed out. The Brigadier
surveyed the others.
   `I think a few explanations are in order,' he said.
   Everyone started to talk at once. The Brigadier held up
his hand for silence. `We may be in a rather unusual
situation, but we shall conduct this de-briefing in a proper
military manner. We'll start with you, Miss Grant. What
happened to you and the Doctor after you, er,
disappeared?'
   Jo frowned. It all seemed such a long time ago. `Well,'
she began, `we woke up on one of those nasty grey sand
dunes... `

The Temporal Control Room of the Time Lords was
almost completely dark. The President of the Council sat
before the one monitor screen that still showed a faint glow
of life. He operated the controls with clumsy fingers--it
was many hundreds of years since he had performed such a
menial task. But now there was no-one else. The Junior
Time Lord lay sprawled across the floor at his feet, and in
the nearby council chamber the members of the High
Council lay slumped across the table, drained of all energy,
drained almost of life itself.
   Hoping desperately that the tiny trickle of power
remaining in the storage banks would serve his purpose,
the President touched a final control.
   A faint, fluctuating picture emerged on the screen, the
proud, fierce face of a formidable old man. `Well,' it said
grumpily, `now what d'you want?'
   The President gave a gasp of relief. `Our energy
situation is critical, Doctor. The drainage through the
black hole is affecting our life-force. You are our last
chance. You must go through.'
   `Me? Through the black hole? Certainly not!'
   The President spaced out his words carefully, guarding
his remaining strength. `All three are needed to defeat
Omega--two not enough... must be totality. I'll use our last
vestige of energy to send you through. You must consent.'
   `Oh very well. You'd better get on with it.'
   A final movement of the failing fingers over the control
console and the picture faded away. The President
slumped face downwards across the console. Like his
fellow Time Lords he was in a protective coma, only the
tiniest glimmer of life-force remained. Unless the energy
drain was halted soon, even that would be gone. So too
would that of the other Time Lords. As the energy blight
spread, it would destroy every living creature in the
Universe, and then the Universe itself.
                       9
        `All things shall be destroyed'
Beside a towering cascade of flame, the being who had
planned the end of the Universe looked at the two Time
Lords standing meekly before him.
    `No doubt you have guessed why you have been brought
here. What it is that I need from you?'
    The Doctor, now recovered from his ordeal in the arena,
said nothing. Doctor Two, apparently more anxious to
please, nodded eagerly. `Well, yes, er, of course. Well, that
is...'
    His voice tailed away feebly. The Doctor looked down at
him disparagingly and said, `What he means is--no. We
haven't the faintest idea.'
    Omega sighed, resigned to the stupidity of all other
beings in the Universe. `You know, at least, that this world
exists by the effort of my will--because of my control over
singularity.'
    `Very impressive,' said Doctor Two, rather like someone
being shown a really good card trick.
    Omega ignored him. `In singularity, everything is
possible. I can create whatever I wish by the exercise of my
will.' He nodded towards the taller Time Lord. `You have
experienced the way I can exteriorise my thoughts, even
my feelings!'
    The Doctor rubbed his throat. `I have indeed,' he
agreed.
    Doctor Two piped up again, `I say,' he said foolishly,
`you mean you just have to think of something, rub your
magic wand over there...' he nodded disrespectfully at the
pillar of fire, `and shalamy-galamy-zoop, there it is? I call
that jolly clever.' A sudden thought seemed to strike him.
`You couldn't run me up a quick flute, could you?'
    Omega glared down at him. The room darkened, the
flame flickered, and a distant threatening rumble of
thunder gave proof of Omega's mounting anger. The
Doctor poked his other self sharply in the ribs, but the
clownish little man seemed lost to all reason. He held up
his hands, a little apart. `Wooden thing, about this long,
with holes in it.' He looked hopefully at Omega.
   Omega's voice boomed out angrily. `I shall tell you now
of the task before you...'
   `Well it's not much to ask, is it?' muttered Doctor Two.
`I mean, one little flute...'
   This time the thunder filled the room, and the fountain
of flame seemed to roar in sympathy. Hurriedly the Doctor
said, `Just ignore him, please. I'm afraid he's incorrigibly
frivolous.'
   Once more there came that sulky but quite audible
mutter from the level of his shoulder. `Just because you're
not musical. Wasn't your flute, was it?'
   The Doctor hissed, `Oh do stop interrupting us.'
Turning to Omega he said politely, `I'm so sorry. Please
continue.'
   Omega's angry bellow seemed to shake the entire castle.
`Continue? You face annihilation, do you know that? You,
your entire Time Lord race, the Universe itself, and what
do you do? You babble of flutes!'
   The Doctor took his companion firmly by the elbow,
and led him a little to one side. `Give me a moment to talk
to him, Omega. I will make him realise his folly.'
   Omega roared, `You would be wise to do so, for both
your sakes.' He stalked closer to his pillar of flame, as if to
commune with it.
   The Doctor leaned over his other self and whispered
urgently, `Just what do you think you're doing?'
   There was no hint of foolishness in the serious face that
looked up at him. `Testing his powers of self-control. Can't
say I think very much of them.'
   `I think I see what you're up to. Dangerous though. If
you provoke him too far, he'll kill you. Kill us both!'
   `Have to risk that,' whispered Doctor Two. `That temper
of his is his only weakness...'
   Omega rounded upon them, suspicious of their lowered
voices. `Do you plot against me?'
   The Doctor hurried back towards him. `No, no, I assure
you. I was simply telling my--associate to show more
respect, to listen carefully to what you have to say.'
   The second Doctor came and stood meekly beside him.
`Please go on, Omega. You were mentioning some task...'
   Omega gestured towards the pillar of flame. `Here is the
source of the light stream along which you travelled.'
   The Doctor nodded, remembering the streak of `space-
lightning' which had first shown up on Tyler's cosmic-ray
device.
   `I created it, I alone, Omega. Yet it is not enough. None
of it is enough. I am trapped, as surely as I was when I first
arrived in this desolation.'
   Puzzled, the Doctor said, `I take it you want to leave
here? But surely, if you can transmit matter to and from
Earth along this light-beam, you could transport yourself,
well, anywhere?'
   `So I imagined. No, Doctor, there was no escape! As
long as I control singularity, I can make it do my will.
Without my will's unceasing pressure, everything here
would revert to chaos.'
   At last the Doctor saw the full irony of Omega's
predicament. `So, the moment you abandon control, you
cannot escape. And you cannot escape without abandoning
control?'
   The great masked figure bowed its head. `That is your
task, Doctor, both of you. To take over my burden so that I
can escape. Only when the Time Lords accept me as their
supreme ruler, will I consent to save their Universe.'
   The two Doctors looked at each other, as the full horror
of the situation dawned upon them. They were to remain,
trapped forever in this appalling place, while Omega
became the ruler of the Time Lords, using their power for
his own lunatic ends.
   A note of irony came into Omega's voice. `My world
does not please you? Then you may transform it, once I
have taught you the trick--see!'
   One wall of the Singularity Chamber faded away to
reveal a beautiful green landscape, rolling fields, orchards
in blossom, great stretches made colourful with trees, grass
and flowers. `Just such a world did I create when I first
came here. But the beauty and the colour demand much
effort from the will. As thousands upon thousands of years
roll by, the strain becomes too great.' As Omega spoke, the
colour drained from the landscape, the vegetation faded
away, until only rolling grey dunes were left. `You will end,
as I did, with the simplest elements--sand, sea and sky.'
   After a moment the Doctor said, `And what if we refuse
your generous offer?'
   `Then the light-beam will go on absorbing energy from
the world of matter. You, not I, will be responsible for the
destruction of the Universe. What is your answer?'
   The Doctor opened his mouth to reply, but Doctor Two
forestalled him. `We will obey you, Omega. We have no
choice.'
   A golden throne appeared behind Omega and he
lowered himself upon it. `Come--remove this mask.'
   The two Doctors approached. Now that Omega was
sitting, the great metal mask was within their reach. `You
too will need such masks,' said Omega. `Working with the
light-beam has a slow corrosive effect, due to the
acceleration of the particles.'
   Omega's `mask' was in fact a kind of metal helmet,
similar in construction to that on a suit of armour. It
covered both head and shoulders although the `head' was
made to be separately detached. The fact that the light-
beam was so dangerous, thought the Doctor, explained the
metal mask, metallic robes, the metal boots and gauntlets,
with which Omega always protected himself.
   As their fingers worked on the fastenings, the Doctors
could not help wondering what sort of face they would find
beneath it. If the corrosion of the light-beam had already
started its work... As the last fastenings came free, they
braced themselves and lifted up the head-piece of the
helmet.
   What they saw beneath it froze them both with pity and
horror. With one accord they lowered the mask back into
place. But before they could close the fastenings, Omega
swung his head round angrily. `Why do you not obey me?'
he roared.
   The two Doctors looked at each other in helpless
silence. There was genuine sympathy in the Doctor's voice
as he replied, `We cannot, Omega.'
   `There would be no point,' confirmed Doctor Two.
`Destroy us if you wish--but what you want can never be.'
   Slowly Omega rose to his feet. He strode across to one
wall, and waved his hand. Immediately the surface became
smooth and polished, a mirror of bronze. Gauntleted hands
fumbling a little, Omega lifted the mask from his own
shoulders. He raised it high above his head. Beneath it he
saw--nothing. Just empty space. With a great howl of
anguish Omega replaced the mask.
   Sadly the Doctor said, `The corrosion has already done
its work. Your physical being has been eaten away. There
is nothing left of you--except your will.'
   `It is not true,' bellowed Omega. `I am! I exist! I am
Omega, creator of this world.'
   `Don't you see,' said the Doctor sadly, `you can exist only
in this world.'
   Doctor Two nodded. `You have built your own prison.
You can never leave it.' In the little Doctor's
compassionate voice the words had the sonorous ring of a
judge passing sentence.
   They watched as Omega swayed to and fro, grappling
with the horror of his fate. Hands flung out in anguish,
Omega became still. With a terrible deliberation the great
voice rang out. `If I exist only by my will, my will is to
destroy. All things shall be destroyed. All things! All
things!'
   A great crack of thunder split open the roof, letting in a
howling wind, which made the fountain of flame flare up
wildly. Jagged cracks appeared in the metal walls. The
floor beneath their feet seemed to flow like a metal ocean.
   Omega reeled to and fro in the flame, filling the place
with howls of maniacal laughter.
   The Doctor was watching the spectacle appalled, when
he felt a tug at his sleeve. `Told you he'd got no self-
control,' whispered Doctor Two. `I think this is our
chance, don't you?'
   As the two Doctors ran along the metal corridors, the
whole building seemed to heave and quake around them.
No-one attempted to stop them as they made for the great
main doors at a staggering run.
   It was like being caught in a combined earthquake and
thunderstorm. As they reached the entrance hall, they saw
the doors buckled open, one of them hanging from its
hinges. Outside was a night of howling storm, lightning
streaked across the purple sky, and winds whipped the grey
sands into swirling clouds. Gripping each other's hands
they plunged into the darkness.
   Only one thing saved them from being hopelessly lost as
they ran through the ever-changing shifting landscape,
eyes and mouths choked by the swirling sand, blinded by
lightning, deafened by thunder. They were making for the
transported UNIT H.Q., and that meant for the TARDIS.
As Time Lords, they had a homing instinct for the
TARDIS stronger than that of any homing pigeon.
Lurching and staggering they stumbled on through the
howling chaos.

The Brigadier looked out of the laboratory window and
wished he was back in England. In fact he wished the
whole building was back in England. They were on the
outer fringes of the storm which centred on Omega's castle,
but they could see the howling gale outside, and hear the
rumbling of thunder.
   Tyler, Jo and Benton were finishing a kind of picnic
meal, raked up from the UNIT canteen. It was cold, of
course, and since the power sources were literally cut off,
mostly out of tins, but it had made them all feel much
better. The walls of the room were lined with an
assortment of weapons, which Benton had brought up
from the armoury. All in all, the Brigadier was pretty well
satisfied with his situation. If only the Doctor would turn
up, they could all get in the TARDIS and go home.
   Jo joined him at the window, carrying a pinkish piece of
meat on the end of a fork. `Where do you get your supplies
from, Brigadier? I'll swear this bully beef was canned for
the Boer War.'
   The Brigadier inspected it solemnly. `Nonsense. Best
1940 vintage! They don't make it like that any more.'
   Jo gave him a look, and popped the lump of meat into
her mouth, chewing vigorously. `Storm seems to be easing
a bit,' she said a little indistinctly.
   The Brigadier nodded. `Funny thing though--wind's
dying down but the thunder's getting worse. Listen.'
   Above the wind, both heard a series of crashes. They
seemed to be moving closer. `Thunder be blowed,' said the
Brigadier suddenly. `Those are explosions. Stand by,
everybody.'
   They all seized weapons from the selection around the
walls. `Seems to be coming from the front,' said the
Brigadier. They moved along the corridors towards the
main door.
   Nearby, on the dunes, the two Doctors were thankful
that the storm was easing. `Not much further, I think,' said
the Doctor, as they staggered to the top of yet another
dune. As they came over the rise, he shouted, `Look!'
Lashed by the dying storm, the UNIT building lay before
them.
   Doctor Two tapped him on the shoulder. `You look, old
chap.' The Doctor turned. A line of blob-men was
lumbering purposefully towards them.
   `We're just in time,' said the Doctor. `Come on, we'd
better get inside.' They started to run down the slope. A
line of explosions followed them. From the dunes ahead
more blob-men appeared on every side.
   The menacing circle of Omega's servants lumbered ever
nearer. Explosions began to tear up the ground all around
them. They were surrounded--and cut off from UNIT
H.Q.
                      10
           Return through the Flame
Just inside the main door, the Brigadier and his small army
listened to the explosions.
    `Sounds like a full-scale attack,' muttered the Brigadier.
    Jo Grant, staggering under the weight of an anti-tank
rifle, panted, `Brigadier, maybe they're not firing at us at
all. Maybe it's the Doctor..
    The Brigadier said, `I'm going to check.' He unlocked
and unbarred the door and opened it a crack. Peering out
he saw two figures, one tall and one short, racing across the
sand towards them, twisting and turning to dodge the
explosions that erupted at their feet.
    `It's the Doctor,' yelled the Brigadier. `Covering fire,
everybody.'
    Just as the Doctors realised that their enemies had cut
off their approach to UNIT H.Q., they saw the doors flung
open, and a strange looking force emerge. It was led by the
Brigadier, with a Sterling sub-machine gun. Behind him
came Benton, cradling a Bren-gun without its tripod. Tyler
had an anti-tank rifle, Hollis his shot-gun, and Jo Grant
brought up the rear with a rifle that seemed almost as tall
as she was.
    Cupping his hands to his mouth the Brigadier yelled,
`Get down, both of you.'
    The two Doctors flung themselves to the ground as
something that sounded very like a full-scale battle broke
out above their heads.
    As fast as the blob-men came up, the UNIT party
blasted them to pieces. Benton literally sliced one in two
with his Bren, and was horrified when the thick legs
continued running towards him for a moment, before
toppling into the sand. Direct hits from grenades
disintegrated the creatures completely. The machine guns
and Benton's Bren sliced them into separate fragments
which wriggled horribly on the ground as they tried to
reassemble themselves.
   Jo Grant's contribution to the battle was limited. The
recoil from her rifle knocked her flat on her back as soon as
she fired it. Hugging her bruised shoulder, she decided to
remain an observer. Although she realised that the blob-
men couldn't be killed--as soon as they were blasted to
bits, those bits started coming together again--there was
something horrifying about seeing them mown down. She
was very glad when she heard the Brigadier yell, `Cease
fire! Run for it, Doctor!'
   The two Doctors picked themselves up and sprinted
towards the doors. Even as they did so, more blob-men
appeared in pursuit. The Brigadier bustled everyone
through the doors. He and Benton, reloading frantically,
hung back and fought a rearguard action, blasting down
the blob-men as they appeared and falling back along the
corridor to the laboratory.
   As they dashed inside they saw the Doctor waiting by
the open door of the TARDIS. He waved them in, and
followed. Doctor Two was already at the control console.
He closed the door, and set the force-field in operation.
   For a moment the little party stood gasping for breath,
waiting for the rattle of bullets and the roaring of
explosions to die away from their ears. Tyler and Hollis
were gaping around them in amazement, and the two
Doctors were excitedly shaking hands and slapping backs
with Jo and Benton. The Brigadier cleared his throat
meaningfully, and everyone turned to look at him. `Now,
Doctor,' said the Brigadier sternly, `I'd like some
explanations from you.' He looked at the Doctor's tall
figure, and at the smaller figure of the second Doctor
standing at his side. `In fact,' said the Brigadier, accepting
the inevitable, `I'd like some explanations from both of
you.'
Omega stood brooding in his ruined hall. In his mind's eye
he had watched the battle outside UNIT, and seen the
Doctors escape into the TARDIS. In his present mood of
bleak despair it mattered little to him.
   `Fools,' he muttered. `Soon you will leave your pitiful
refuge and come crawling to me for mercy. And by that
time, your Universe will no longer exist!'

`... So there you are,' said the Doctor. `They can't get in--
and we can't get out.'
     `We're besieged,' concluded Doctor Two. `If only I
could find my flute, I could play you a little tune to pass
the time.'
     `We must be thankful for small mercies,' said the
Brigadier.
     `Doctor,' said Jo. `Why can't we just clear off home in
the TARDIS?'
     The Doctor replied, `Because for one thing, we've done
nothing yet to deal with Omega's plan.'
     Doctor Two went to the console and flicked controls.
`And for another, we're immobilised, locked here by the
force of Omega's will.'
     `So what will he do now?'
     The Doctor shrugged. `Nothing, I imagine. Just wait.'
     Doctor Two nodded in agreement. `He's already waited
for thousands of years.'
     The rest of the party looked at each other appalled. It
was Tyler who expressed their thoughts. `This TARDIS of
yours is a real marvel, Doctor, but I don't fancy spending
the rest of my life in it.'
     A light began to flash over the TARDIS scanner. The
Doctor said incredulously, `Someone's trying to get
through.'
     Doctor Two rushed to the scanner controls, `You don't
think it could be...'
     `Who else?'
     Sure enough, the blurred image of the third Doctor
appeared faintly on the screen. The old man gave his two
other selves the usual disapproving glare. `Well, what's all
this--a mass meeting?'
   The Doctor glanced round the rather crowded TARDIS.
`We had to bring them all in here with us,' he said
defensively. `Nowhere else safe.'
   The old man sniffed. `In a pretty pickle, aren't you?
Trapped in your own TARDIS indeed!'
   `It's all very well for you to talk,' snapped the Doctor.
   `Talk's all I can do,' interrupted the old man, `and not
too much of that. The transference isn't stable. So let's get
on with it, shall we?'
   `On with what?' asked Doctor Two.
   `Putting our heads together and finding a solution--
hey?'
   Watched by all the others in the TARDIS, the two
Doctors froze. Each had one hand touching the other's
temples, one hand resting on the scanner screen. There was
a moment's silence, while the air seemed to throb with
mental energy. The two Doctors stepped back, looking at
each other with sudden excitement.
   `Then we're all agreed,' said the old man on the screen.
`Risky, but it could work. I wish you both the very best of...'
   Abruptly he faded away.
   The Brigadier looked at Jo. `What was all that about,
Miss Grant?'
   `Another of their telepathic conferences, I think.'
   `And the old chap on the screen--he wasn't...?'
   Jo nodded. `I'm afraid so.'
   `Three of 'em! I didn't know when I was well off!'
   The two Doctors were laying plans.
   `We'd have to switch off the force-field generator,' said
the second Doctor thoughtfully.
   The Doctor nodded. `And that will leave us defenceless.
   Doctor Two nodded. `We'll have to risk it, all the same.'
   Working quickly, the Doctor began to disconnect a side-
panel of the console, while Doctor Two switched off the
force-field.
    `What's going on?' demanded the Brigadier.
    Without looking up from his work, the Doctor said, `We
think we've found a way to deal with Omega.'
    Doctor Two, who was helping him to lift away the
panel, gave a sudden yelp of excitement. `Look--my flute.
There it is, stuck inside the generator.' He was reaching to
fish it out, when the Doctor stopped him. `No, don't touch
it. It's exactly what we need.'
    `Oh no! Not my flute.'
    `I'll get you another. I'll get you a million of 'em,' said
the Doctor exultantly. `Come on, let's get to work..?
    From a storage locker, the Doctor produced a jumble of
advanced electronic equipment. The rest of the party
looked on baffled as the two Doctors worked furiously.
    Jo sighed. `Well, at least they're doing something.'
    `Yes, but what?' demanded the Brigadier peevishly.
`And what's that wretched flute got to do with it?'
    In an amazingly short time the task was complete. The
end result was a sort of plastic casket, which seemed to
glow slightly. Inside it rested Doctor Two's flute.
    With painful politeness the Brigadier tried again, `Do
you think you might tell me, gentlemen, what all this
nonsense means?'
    The Doctor gave him a triumphant grin. `It means,
Brigadier, that we can strike a bargain with Omega!'
    `With a plastic box of tricks and a flute?'
    Doctor Two chuckled. `The box of tricks is a sort of
portable force-field.'
    `And the flute, in the circumstances,' said the Doctor
solemnly, `is very much more than just a flute.' He looked
across at his other self. `I say, how do we get in touch with
him?'
    Doctor Two went to the scanner. `I'll send out a general
call. He's bound to hear.' He twiddled the scanner controls,
and said, `Omega, we must speak with you. Can you hear
us?'
   After a moment, a blurred picture of Omega appeared
on the screen. The cruel metal mask stared at them
malevolently. `Have the rats decided to leave their bolt-
hole?'
   The Doctor said, `We have found a way to give you your
freedom. Can you free the TARDIS so we can come to
you?'
   `You wish to come to me?' There was a note of surprise
in the voice. `Then you shall!' The picture faded. Doctor
Two operated the controls, and the TARDIS
dematerialisation noise began.
   `It's working,' whispered Jo. `Can't you take us home
now?'
   `I'm afraid not. We can go only where Omega wants us
to go.'
   The journey was a short one. When the TARDIS
landed, they stepped out into Omega's Singularity
Chamber, at the base of the great pillar of flame.
   The castle was still in ruins, the metal walls cracked and
buckled, the roof gaping open to the purple sky.
   The Doctor knew that by simply willing it so, Omega
could have brought it back to perfect repair. It was a
measure of the depth of Omega's despair that he had not
bothered to do even that.
   The little party filed out of the TARDIS, the two
Doctors in the lead, and stood waiting. Omega did not
speak.
   `We have come to help you,' said the Doctor boldly. `We
have devised a means to give you your freedom.'
   Omega straightened up, and the great metal mask
swung towards them. `What is this? More trickery?'
   `You must return our friends to safety. We shall stay to
assume your burdens.'
   Jo sobbed. `No, Doctor.' But the Doctor continued as if
she hadn't spoken.
   `Do you accept our bargain, Omega?'
   Omega gestured to the pillar of flame. `They may leave.
Let them give thanks that Omega is merciful.'
    The Doctor turned to the little group. `I want all of you
to step into that flame. It won't hurt you. On the contrary,
it will take you home.'
    There was a murmur of protest. Doctor Two said gently,
`Please, do as we ask--or you'll spoil everything.'
    The Brigadier took charge. `Do as the Doctor says
please. Mr. Hollis, Dr. Tyler.'
    Scarcely realising what was happening, Hollis and Tyler
stumbled into the pillar of flame and vanished. `Benton,
Miss Grant,' ordered the Brigadier. Jo struggled and
protested, but at a nod from the Brigadier, Benton simply
picked her up and stepped into the flame with her. The
two of them vanished. The Brigadier straightened his
uniform cap, raised his hand to the brim in salute, stepped
smartly into the flame and he too disappeared. The two
Doctors were left alone with Omega.
    Omega's voice boomed out. `Well, brother Time Lords,
I have played your game. I know there can be no escape for
me--nor yet for you.'
    The Doctor held out the casket. `You can have your
freedom, Omega. It is here.'
    Omega took a step forward, as if he felt hope, in spite of
himself. He looked down at the casket. `What is this that
you bring me?'
    The Doctor said, `The only freedom you can ever have.'
A sudden ring of command in his voice, he ordered `Take
it, Omega!'
    As if hypnotised, Omega reached out and took the
casket. He stared at it in amazement, and started to open
the lid.
    The two Doctors began to edge towards the TARDIS...
    Omega opened the lid, and looked inside. `A flute?' As
his metal-gauntleted hand reached out for it, both Doctors
started to run.
    Omega's fingers touched the flute--and he and the
world of his creation exploded into nothingness.
                     11
          Three Doctors Minus Two
Perhaps because it was her second journey down the light-
beam, Jo Grant recovered more quickly this time. She
woke up, face down on a polished parquet floor, her nose
inches away from a government filing cabinet. She looked
round. She was back in the Doctor's laboratory and the
room was full of confused people picking themselves up.
The Brigadier, Tyler, Sergeant Benton... The laboratory
furniture was back too, benches, stools, filing cabinets, all
in their proper places. She could see the familiar view
through the windows. The building was back where it
should be. Everything was back--except the TARDIS.
   Panic-stricken, Jo demanded, `The Doctors? Where are
they?'
   Dr. Tyler answered her. `They got us away first, didn't
they. They made sure of that. Before...'
   His voice tailed off. Jo ran across to him. `Please, you've
got to tell me.'
   `Well, if my guess is right, that flute was unconverted
matter, our kind of matter. Omega and his world--anti-
matter. Put 'em together and--finish!'
   Tears came into Jo's eyes. `And finish for the Doctor,
too?' She began to sob.
   The Brigadier found he had a lump in his throat.
   `Wonderful chap. Both of him,' he said, a little
incoherently. `Privilege to know him. Had his little ways of
course--sometimes hasty words--faults on both sides...'
   Before the Brigadier went on to say something he might
later have regretted, the TARDIS materialised in its usual
corner and both Doctors stepped out, beaming happily.
`Doctor,' roared the Brigadier, `what the blazes do you
mean by frightening us like that?'
The Temporal Control Room was ablaze with activity,
every piece of equipment in full operation, Time Lords
bustling about trying to catch up on their arrears of work.
Before one of the screens stood the Chancellor and the
President.
   `A brilliant scheme,' the Chancellor was saying. `Of
course, you always had my full backing.'
   `Of course,' said the President, with gentle irony. The
Junior Time Lord looked up. `I think he's coming through
now, sir...'
   The old man on the screen peered at them. Despite his
usual air of grumpiness, there was a twinkle in his eye.
   `Our heartiest congratulations, Doctor,' said the
President. `Total success. Omega destroyed and the energy
leak checked...'
   `More than checked,' added the Chancellor. `Converted
into a new power source.' He indicated a nearby screen.
Where there had once been the black hole was now an
expanding blaze of light.
   I'm glad you're satisfied,' said the old man acidly. `Black
hole into supernova--once again Omega has provided. You
really ought to be grateful to him. Put me in touch with the
rest of me, will you?'
   At a nod from the President, the Junior Time Lord
began manipulating the controls. The picture on the screen
faded.
   The President looked at the Chancellor. `I think we
should indeed be grateful, my lord. Not to poor Omega,
whose end to some extent atoned for his crimes, but to the
Doctor, who saved us all from extinction.'
   `What reward would you suggest?'
   The President was silent for a moment. He was
remembering a trial at which he himself had presided,
remembering the sentence passed on the Doctor. A change
of appearance, and exile to Earth for an indefinite period...
   `I think we both know, my lord,' he said. `There is only
one reward that would mean anything to the Doctor.'
The Doctor stretched an elastic band as far as he could
then let it go. It sprang back against his hand and he
sucked his stung fingers. `And there you are, you see?'
    His audience--the Brigadier, Jo, Sergeant Benton and
Dr. Tyler--looked at him blankly. Jo said, `Where?'
    Doctor Two was perched cross-legged on the bench,
looking at a mouth-organ, but without any real
enthusiasm. He played a few bars of `Oh Susannah', not
very well.
    A little crossly, the Doctor shushed him and explained,
`Omega's will was the tension in the elastic. When it let go,
everything returned to its proper place. We got to the
TARDIS just in time...'
    The Brigadier winced as Doctor Two played another
trill on his mouth-organ. `And all that fuss about the flute?'
    A little sadly, Doctor Two took up the tale. `I lost it you
see--and it dropped into the force-field core of the
TARDIS. Then when we were all "converted"--so we could
mix with anti-matter--it wasn't. It stayed in its original
state.'
    `We rigged up a portable force-field to keep it that way,'
explained the Doctor, `and once Omega touched it, that
was it!'
    `Big bang--and black hole into supernova,' concluded
Doctor Two. `Pity it had to be my flute. It had a lovely
tone...'
    Suddenly a plaintive bleeping came from the TARDIS.
The Doctor said, `Him again--it must be!' He rushed
inside, followed by Doctor Two. A little hesitantly, the
others followed them.
    The face of the old man was already on the scanner
screen, looking at the two Doctors. `Only just made it,
hey?' he was saying, not without a touch of gleeful malice.
`Well, the party's over now. Everyone back to their proper
time zones. You young chaps didn't do too badly, I
suppose. Though the first thing I would have done...' He
faded abruptly away.
   Everyone turned to look at Doctor Two. He stood there
for a moment, unimpressive as ever, smiling his gentle
smile. He held out his hands in a gesture of farewell. `Oh
dear,' he said. `So nice to have met you all. Goodbye.' And
he too vanished.
   Jo gave a little cry of disappointment. `Oh Doctor, he's
gone. And he was so sweet!'
   The Doctor gave her a rather enigmatic smile. `Yes, he
was, wasn't he.' He shooed them all out of the TARDIS,
and came out after them locking the door.
   The Brigadier looked round carefully, as if making sure
that the second Doctor was really gone. `Nice little chap,
but as far as I'm concerned, Doctor, one of you is quite
enough. Come along, Benton, we've got to get this place
running again. We'll have to make a full inventory.
Everything's got to be accounted for.'
   Benton rose to his feet obediently. `Yessir,' he said.
Then he paused. `Sir?--if anything is missing--where do
we say it's gone?'
   `Come along, Benton,' said the Brigadier firmly, and
marched him away.
   Tyler said, `Well, I'd better be off too. Thanks for the
trip, Doctor. I don't think I'll write it up for the University
though!'
   The Doctor sat perched on a stool, elbows on knees,
chin in hands, his face sombre.
   Jo knew him well enough by now to realise that he
never found his victories a source of unalloyed pleasure.
Somehow there was always too much sympathy for the
defeated enemy. `It's Omega, isn't it?' she asked. `You're
unhappy because you had to trick him?'
   `I didn't really trick him. I promised him his freedom,
and I gave it to him. The only freedom he could ever
have--utter annihilation.'
   Jo respected the Doctor's scruples, but she didn't share
them. As far as she was concerned the end of Omega was a
thoroughly good thing. How could you feel sorry for
someone who had planned to destroy the entire Universe?
   A sound filled the room. It was like the TARDIS
dematerialisation noise, only much quieter, and it came
not from the TARDIS but from the laboratory bench in
front of 0 them. A complex piece of equipment was
appearing, fading slowly up into view. To her surprise Jo
seemed to recognise it
   The Doctor had been trying to repair something like it
when she had first met him in this very laboratory. Ever
since she had known him, he had been trying desperately
to evade the sentence of exile passed by the Time Lords
and get the TARDIS going again.
   There was no doubt that the Doctor recognised the
strange-looking object. He picked it up carefully, almost
with reverence.
   `It's the Time Lords! They've sent me a new
dematerialisation circuit.' He clutched his head. `And my
Time Travel theory--it's all coming back to me. Don't you
see what this means? They've revoked the sentence!' The
Doctor rose to his feet and began striding excitedly about
the laboratory. `Think of it! All of Space and Time, to
roam in as I please.'
   `I am thinking of it,' said Jo. `I suppose you'll be rushing
off just as soon as you possibly can?'
   The Doctor stopped his pacing. He'd been less than
tactful, he realised, in showing his pleasure so openly.
   As he looked at Jo's sad little figure, the Doctor realised
something else. Now that the ability to take off in the
TARDIS was once more within his power, he wasn't sure
he wanted to go. He knew he'd miss his friends, Jo, the
Brigadier, Sergeant Benton, and his life as UNIT's
Scientific adviser. For the first time, in many years of
wandering, he'd found something that could be called a
home, and he didn't want to give it up. Not completely,
that is. One or two little trips from time to time, of course...
   He put his arm round Jo's shoulders and gave her a
consoling hug. `You surely didn't think I'd just go off and
leave you?'
   Jo looked at him suspiciously. `Frankly, yes!'
   `I couldn't do that even if I wanted to.' He held up the
circuit. `This has to be installed first--and that's a long
and complicated job. The poor old TARDIS will need a
thorough overhaul. It'll all take quite a while.'
   `But you will go--eventually?'
   `Tell you what, when the TARDIS is ready, I'll take you
on a trip. Did I ever tell you about Metebelis, the famous
blue planet of the Acteon galaxy? Lakes like great
sapphires, mountains of blue crystal...'
   Jo wasn't listening. A sudden worrying thought had
struck her. `Doctor, what about Mr. Hollis, the game
warden? He didn't turn up here with the rest of us.'
   The Doctor smiled reassuringly. `Well, he didn't start
from here, did he? Don't worry, Jo. I'm sure Mr. Hollis is
back in his proper place--just like everyone else. Now,
about our trip to Metebelis...'

It all ended very quietly, just as it had begun. Arthur
Hollis picked himself up, looked around, and nodded in
silent satisfaction. Grass, trees, flowers, and above all birds.
The starlings were chattering indignantly, disturbed by his
sudden arrival. A flapping sound made him look up. A
silvery-grey balloon was tangled in one of the trees. No
sign of an orange-coloured box, though, he noted
thankfully.
   Hollis picked up his shot-gun, checked it was empty,
tucked it under his arm and set off for his cottage. As he
drew near, he saw his wife standing at the garden gate
waiting for him, and he quickened his step.
   As soon as he was in earshot, Mrs. Hollis began scolding
him affectionately. `And where do you think you've been,
Arthur Hollis? People here looking for you, scientists,
soldiers and I don't know what. Told 'em you'd be back in
your own good time. Where've you been?'
   Arthur Hollis looked at his wife. She was one of the
best, his Mary, but a terrible one to talk. Ran in the family;
her mother and her sisters were just the same. Hollis
himself had never been much of a talker. The thought of
describing his adventures to his wife, and trying to answer
her questions, filled him with horror.
   He put his arm round her waist and gave her an
affectionate hug. `Wouldn't believe me if I told you,
woman. Now then, supper ready?'
   They went inside the cottage and the door closed
behind them.
