Setting the controls for Earth, the Doctor
is surprised when the Tardis lands in a
primeval forest. Has the Tracer gone
wrong or has some impulse deep in his
unconscious mind directed him to this
alien planet? In investigating the forest,
the Doctor meets and assists Leela, a
warrior banished from her tribe, the
Sevateem. Through Leela, it gradually
becomes apparent that the constant war
between the Sevateem and the Tesh has
been instigated by the god they both
worship, Xoanon.
Xoanon, an all-powerful computer, is
possessed by a desperate madness ­ a
madness that is directly related to Doctor
Who, that causes Xoanon to assume the
voice and form of the Doctor, a madness
that is partly caused by the Doctor and
that only the Doctor himself can rectify!
The Doctor must not only do battle with
Xoanon, but also must escape from the
savage practices of the Sevateem, and the
technically mind-controlling destructive
impulses of the Tesh.

Cover illustration by Jeff Cummins




                 UK: 60p *Australia: $2.20
                 Malta: 65c New Zealand: $1.90
                 *Recommended Price
                 Children/Fiction     ISBN 0 426 20006 3
          DOCTOR WHO
            AND THE
          FACE OF EVIL
Based on the BBC television serial by Chris Boucher by
arrangement with the British Broadcasting Corporation


           TERRANCE DICKS




                   published by
             The Paperback Division of
              W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd
A Target Book
Published in 1978
by the Paperback Division of W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd.
A Howard & Wyndham Company
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

Novelisation copyright © Terrance Dicks 1978
Original script copyright © Chris Boucher 1977
`Doctor Who' series copyright © British Broadcasting
Corporation 1977, 1978

Printed in Great Britain by
The Anchor Press Ltd, Tiptree, Essex


ISBN 0426 20006 3

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it
is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
               CONTENTS
1 The Outcast
2 The Invisible Terror
3 Captured
4 The Face on the Mountain
5 Attack
6 Danger for Leela
7 The Test of the Horda
8 Beyond the Wall
9 The Tesh
10 The Summons
11 Xoanon
12 The Trap
13 The Last Battle
14 Recovery
15 Departure
                         1
                    The Outcast
The Sevateem were holding a trial.
   The big Council hut was packed with elders and
warriors. Andor, Chief of the Tribe, sat on his throne of
shining metal. Around him stood his Councillors, Tomas,
Calib and Sole. In the shadows behind the throne waited
Neeva, Shaman, Witch Doctor, Speaker of the Law.
   It was a colourful, barbaric scene. Light from a ring of
smoking torches made the great Council hut bright as day.
It glinted from the weapons of the savage skin-clad
warriors and the strange regalia of the elders. It blazed
fiercely on the prisoner who stood before the throne,
flanked by crossbow-carrying guards.
   The prisoner was a girl called Leela. She was tall, with
brown hair and dark eyes, a broad clear forehead and a
firm chin. Her arms and legs, exposed by her brief skin
costume, were brown and smoothly muscular. She stood
before her accusers wary but unafraid, like a captured wild
animal.
   Calib had taken on the role of prosecutor. He was a wiry,
thin-faced man, his handsome features marred by an air of
cunning. He turned dramatically towards the Chief, as he
concluded his speech of accusation. `You are our leader,
Andor, and you know the Law. There can be but one
punishment for such an offence as this. She must be
banished.'
   There was a growl of agreement from the crowd. Yet
some were silent, out of sympathy for the prisoner. The
sentence of banishment was a sentence of death. The
offender would be cast out, into the Beyond. Who could
hope to survive without the protection of the Tribe?
   Andor tugged thoughtfully at his grizzled beard. He was
a stocky man in his fifties, a grim experienced warrior. He
had fought his way to the throne by strength and ruthless
cunning. There was no succession by right in the Tribe of
Sevateem. The shining throne, handed down from the Old
Time, belonged to the man who could take it--and keep it.
He turned to Sole, his Chief Councillor, and said, `What
say you, Sole?'
    Sole, a man much like Andor himself, stared grimly
ahead. `You should not ask, Andor. The Law is the Law.'
Andor had expected such an answer from his old friend--
even though Leela was Sole's daughter.
    Andor looked at the prisoner, who returned his gaze
proudly. Such a pity, he thought. She was a fine strong girl,
one of the bravest and fiercest of his warriors. Soon she
would have married and had fine sons and daughters to
serve the Tribe. Andor had noticed that Tomas, youngest
of his Council, spent much time with Leela. Now the girl
had condemned herself, by her own rashness. `The Council
is agreed,' said Andor gruffly. `Leela must be sent Beyond.'
    Impulsively Tomas stepped forward. `No, Andor,
pardon her. She is young.'
    `Do not beg, Tomas,' said Leela fiercely. `What I said
was truth.'
    Neeva stepped out from behind the throne, into the
torch-light. He was a small man, with a smooth, ageless
face. His head was shaved to denote his priestly rank. His
ceremonial. robe hung from his shoulders. It was a strange,
silvery garment, all in one piece, with arms and legs and a
round helmet at the neck. It was a sacred relic of the Old
Time, and Neeva wore it draped over his shoulders like a
cloak.
    Neeva was a figure of great authority in the Tribe,
second only to Andor himself. There was a respectful hush
as he spoke. `The girl is a blasphemer. She has profaned the
holy purpose of the Tribe of Sevateem.'
    Leela seemed determined to condemn herself. `Holy
purpose? To die for nothing in another useless attack?'
    `The god Xoanon demands she be cast out,' said Neeva
angrily. `He told me this!'
   `Liar!' snapped Leela. `There is no Xoanon!'
   There was a shocked murmuring from the Tribe. Neeva
spread out his hands. `Blasphemy,' he said triumphantly.
   Andor looked at Leela's proud face, and at the impassive
features of her father. There was nothing he could do for
her now. She had condemned herself before all the Tribe.
Yet there was one faint hope of life he could offer her--life
or a quicker death. `Leela! Will you take the Test of the
Horda?'
   Silently Leela shook her head. Better the unknown
terrors of the Beyond than death in the Pit of the Horda.
   Andor looked round the crowded hut. `Will any take it
for her?'
   No one moved or spoke. Many warriors had looked with
favour on Leela. But life was precious, and after all, there
were other women. Andor looked at Tomas, who dropped
his eyes in shame. Even his love was not strong enough to
face almost-certain death.
   `I will take the Test.' Sole left his place and came to
stand before the throne.
   `No,' shouted Leela. `You'll be killed--'
   `Be silent, daughter,' commanded Sole. `You have said
enough.'
   Andor raised a commanding hand. `Test him!' Two
guards led Sole away.
   Leela could face the prospect of her own death unafraid,
but the thought that her rashness would destroy her father
was more than she could bear. She fell to her knees before
the throne. `Andor, please. Don't let him... Call them
back!' She looked up at Neeva. `Great Shaman, Speaker of
the Law, I was wrong to speak as I did. Forgive me, please,
please...'
   Andor leaned forward on his throne. `Be silent, girl.
Your father is a warrior. Do not shame him.'
   There was a long, long silence. Leela got slowly to her
feet, brushing tears from her eyes as if ashamed of her
outburst.
   The silence was broken at last by a brief scream of agony
from the outskirts of the village. Leela bowed her head,
touching throat, left shoulder and left hip in a ritual
gesture. Many others in the Council hut did the same.
   Andor rose and pronounced sentence. `Outcast of the
Tribe of Sevateem be gone from us.'
   Neeva's voice rose in a kind of chant. `Spawn of the Evil
One, return to your Master!'
   `You have until sunrise,' said Andor sternly. `If, by then,
you are still within the Boundary, you will be thrown to
the Horda.'
   Leela turned and walked away. The crowd drew apart to
let her pass. She was unclean now, accursed, an outcast
from the tribe.
   Tomas stood silent, head bowed in shame. He should
have taken the Test of the Horda. Yet what would have
been the use? Not one in a hundred survided the Test.
Besides, Leela was guilty, she had blasphemed the Law of
the Tribe. Tomas looked up and saw Neeva deep in
conversation with two of his acolytes--young warrior
priests who had been chosen to serve him. The warriors
hurried out of the hut clearly following Leela. Tomas
watched them leave, and then set off after them. Perhaps
he could still do something for Leela after all.

In a forest clearing, not very far away, a strange, wheezing
groaning sound broke the silence and a square blue shape
materialised beneath the mighty trees. A door opened and
a tall curly-haired man stepped out. He wore loose,
comfortable clothes with a vaguely Bohemian air. A broad-
brimmed soft hat was jammed on the back of a tangle of
curly hair, and an incredibly long scarf dangled round his
neck.
   The Doctor stood staring rather bemusedly about him,
as if not sure where he was, or what he was doing there.
The most recent events seemed vague and remote in his
mind. He'd defeated the Master's diabolical scheme to
destroy the Time Lord planet of Gallifrey. Then he'd set
course for Earth. Or had he? Had his fingers sent the
TARDIS to some other destination, guided by some
impulse deep in his unconscious mind.
   The Doctor looked around. He was in a small clearing
in a huge primeval forest. Giant trees towered around him
in all directions, cutting off most of the light from the sky.
The trees were festooned with dangling vines, dense
shrubs and bushes filled the space between tree trunks and
there was a deep, soft carpet of leaves beneath his feet. `Not
Hyde Park, I think,' muttered the Doctor. `Could be a
nexial discontinuity, I suppose. I really must remember to
overhaul that Tracer. I'll put a knot in my hanky...' He
groped in his pockets and produced a red-spotted
handkerchief--with a knot in one corner. `I wonder what
that was for?' The Doctor scratched his head, feeling that
things were getting away from him. It was as if some long-
buried memory was trying to push its way to the surface.
Somehow this place was familiar...
   The Doctor shrugged. If he had brought himself back
here for some purpose there was only one way to find out.
`Little look round, Doctor?' he murmured. `Why not?'
   He set off into the forest then stopped with an obscure
feeling of something missing. Of course! Sarah Jane Smith.
She should have been beside him as usual, grumbling
about their unexpected arrival in a strange destination, and
the dangers they were sure to meet. The Doctor gave a
rueful smile. Sarah was back on Earth now, like Harry
Sullivan and the Brigadier. It had been the Doctor's own
decision to take her back. Time Lord law had prevented
him from taking her to Gallifrey. Besides, it was more than
time that she took up her own ordinary human life again.
Yes, the Doctor decided, he'd acted for the best. But as he
walked through the forest, he couldn't help feeling a little
lonely...
   Leela moved cautiously ahead, crossbow at the ready.
She was still inside the Boundary, but despite this all her
hunter's instincts were on the alert. There were noises not
far behind her. Disturbed shrubbery whispering back into
place, the crackle of dry leaves underfoot. Tiny, almost
inaudible sounds, but to Leela they told a clear story.
Something was tracking her.
   She came to a kind of natural road through the forest. It
stretched at right angles in front of her, barring her way.
Leela hesitated. She had to cross it--but the moment she
stepped into the open she would be exposed to her pursuer.
Since there was no alternative, Leela took a cautious step
into the open. Higher up the glade to her right, someone
else did exactly the same thing. It was one of Neeva's
temple guards, crossbow in hand.
   For a fraction of a second they confronted each other in
mutual astonishment. The guard whipped up his crossbow.
Leela's bow was aimed and ready, and she fired first. The
guard reeled back and fell, a crossbow bolt through his
heart.
   With the instinct of long training Leela instantly
reloaded her crossbow, slotting in a new bolt and forcing
back the heavy metal spring that powered it. Just as the
spring clicked into place she heard a rustling to her left. A
second guard had stepped from cover. Now positions were
reversed. His weapon was aimed and ready, hers still
pointing downwards. Even as she raised her bow to fire
Leela knew she was doomed. There was the twang of a
crossbow spring--and the guard fell face down, a bolt
between his shoulder-blades.
   Tomas stepped forward, bow in hand.
   Leela stared at him. `Tomas! What are you doing here?'
   He stepped over the body of the guard and came
towards her. `I've come to take you back.'
   `You know I can't do that.'
   `Don't you see?' interrupted Tomas. `I saw Neeva send
those guards. He doesn't trust his own prophecies. We can
tell the Council, discredit him.'
   `It wouldn't make any difference... not now.'
   `Leela, you can't cross the Boundary.'
   `They haven't left me much choice.'
   `But you'll be killed. There are phantoms in the
Beyond.'
   `Feast-fire stories,' said Leela scornfully.
   `There's something there,' insisted Tomas. `No one who
crosses the Boundary ever comes back.'
   Leela was silent for a moment. For all her bravado she
knew Tomas was right. Then she said resolutely, `Well,
whatever's there I'll face it. I can take care of myself.'
   `Then I'll go with you.'
   Leela looked affectionately at him. She was fond of
Tomas and didn't blame him for refusing to take the Test
for her. By speaking out against Xoanon she had outraged
his deepest beliefs, and she was touched by his offer to join
her in exile. But it was too late to turn back now--for
either of them. `No,' she said fiercely. `Go back to the
Tribe. I'm going now. Goodbye.'
   She moved away, and Tomas stood staring
disconsolately after her. Leela crossed the ride, then turned
back for a final word of warning. `Beware of the devious
Calib. One day he'll get so cunning even he won't know
what he's planning!' She disappeared into the trees on the
other side.
   Tomas gazed after her a moment longer, then turned
and began his journey back to the village.

Somehow Leela knew when she came to the Boundary. It
was nothing you could see or touch. Rather it was
something you felt, a kind of tingling in the air. It didn't
prevent you from going on, but it made every instinct
scream to turn and go back. It took all her courage to press
on, but she persisted, and a moment later the feeling faded.
She had crossed the Boundary. She was in the Beyond.
   Leela looked round, half-expecting monsters to spring
out of nowhere--but nothing happened. The forest on one
side of the invisible barrier looked exactly like that on the
other. But somehow it felt different, she decided. It was
silent, menacing. It seemed to be waiting. Uneasily she
moved on.
   Leela had no plan in mind. Since no one had ever
returned from the Beyond she had no idea what to expect.
Presumably there was game in this part of the forest too, so
she would be able to survive. Perhaps there was some other
tribe that would take her in. If she tried to return to the
Sevateem they would kill her. Neeva would see to that. By
attacking the god Xoanon she was attacking him, and
Neeva had acted with typical ruthlessness to dispose of the
threat. His attempt had failed, thanks to Tomas. But Leela
knew she would not live long if she ever returned within
Neeva's reach.
   Then she heard the noise of pursuit. Not furtive rustling
sounds this time but the arrogant crashing of some great
beast too powerful to need to conceal its presence. She
started to run, and the sounds,came after her. She broke
into a panic-stricken flight, and the trampling sound
followed her through the forest.
   She came to another glade and ran across it. On the
other side, she paused and turned round. She had to know
what was hunting her. Judging by the volume of the noise
it was making the creature must be enormous, towering
above the trees. Leela turned and saw --nothing. But the
sound was still there, and coming closer. She saw branches
thrust aside, undergrowth trampled flat by the passage of
some enormous bulk. Then a line of colossal footprints
appeared, moving across the clearing towards her. She was
being hunted through the forest by an invisible monster...
                       2
              The Invisible Terror
The trouble with forests, decided the Doctor, is that they
are undoubtedly rather monotonous. The vine-festooned
trees stretched away in every direction, their spreading
leaves combining to make a dense green roof. A kind of
straggling trail led through the low-lying bushes. The only
sound was the crackle of dry leaves underfoot. Occasionally
a clearing gave a brief glimpse of the sky, and beyond the
clearings were yet more trees.
   The Doctor considered returning to the TARDIS and
trying some other planet. But he couldn't rid himself of the
feeling that there was some purpose in his coming to this
place. He strode on through the silent forest, hoping that
this purpose, if there was one, would soon be revealed.
   He heard someone moving towards him. The Doctor
stood still, and waited. A tall brown-haired girl in a brief
costume made of animal skins came haring through the
trees. She tripped over a projecting tree-root and tumbled
at his feet. Instinctively the Doctor moved forward to help
her up. When she saw him looming over her she gave a
gasp or horror.
   He took her hand and helped her to her feet. `Hello, did
I startle you?'
   The girl shrank back. Strange, thought the Doctor, she
didn't look the nervous type. Why was she so frightened of
him? He smiled reassuringly and said, `Don't worry, I
won't hurt you.'
   `The Evil One,' breathed the girl fearfully.
   The Doctor was used to unfriendly receptions, but this
kind of terror was going too far.
   `Well, nobody's perfect, but that's overstating it a bit.
I'm the Doctor. What's your name?'
   `Leela.' Still the same hesitant whisper.
   The Doctor tried to think of some way to reassure her.
`Leela,' he said soothingly. `That's a nice name. I've never
met anybody called Leela.' He fished a crumpled paper bag
from his pocket. `Would you like a jelly baby, Leela?'
   The girl gave a gasp of horror. `It's true then! They used
to tell us the Evil One eats babies.' She made a curious
ritual gesture touching throat, left shoulder and left hip.
   `You mustn't believe all they tell you. Actually these are
sweets... Have one, they're rather good.'
   The girl shook her head, staring at the bag as if it
contained unimaginable horrors. All at once the forest
around them seemed to come alive. Trees began shaking,
the ground quivered, and from every direction there came
a massive trampling sound, and a noise of deep hoarse
breathing.
   The Doctor looked enquiringly at Leela. `Either you
have some very large friends with very bad colds, or we're
in trouble,' he said conversationally. `Now, which is it?'
   `They are the Monsters of the Beyond. They are your
creatures.'
   `They are? I wonder if they know that. What do they
look like?'
   `They cannot be seen. They are phantoms.'
   `Invisible? Then we've got a chance.' Putting his jelly
babies away the Doctor dug deeper into his pockets and
produced a rather ancient-looking mechanical device.
   `A magic talisman?' asked Leela reverently.
   `No, a clockwork egg-timer.' The Doctor began winding
up the device, chatting quietly as he did so, apparently
quite unworried by the thunderous approach of the
monsters. `The visible spectrum will be largely irrelevant
to our invisible friends. They're virtually blind.'
   `Then how do they find us?'
   `Roughly speaking, they home in on our vibrations.'
The Doctor carried the egg-timer over to the rocks and
jammed it in a crevice. `Now, Leela, I want you to do
exactly what I say. We're going to move away, very slowly
and very quietly. No matter what happens, you mustn't cry
out or make any sudden move. And don't run till I tell you.
Is that clear?'
   Leela looked at him in puzzlement. If this really was the
Evil One, why was he going to such trouble to save her
from his own creatures? She decided it was safer not to
argue--she could always escape later.
   She nodded and the Doctor said, `Good. Come on!' He
took Leela's hand and they began creeping away. The
crashing, trampling sounds were very close now, as if one
of the monsters had moved ahead of the rest.
   Suddenly the Doctor said, `Freeze!' and stood quite still
looking behind him.
   `What's the matter?'
   `Sssh! We must tread very carefully' ` Still looking over
his shoulder the Doctor took a step forward, tripped over a
trailing vine and fell flat on his face.
   Immediately there was a tremendous commotion as the
invisible monster came pounding even closer. Leela saw a
line of enormous footprints appearing on the forest floor--
footprints heading straight towards them. Terror-struck
she turned to run, but a discordant jangling rang out. It
was the bell on the egg-timer. Immediately the footprints
veered, making their way towards this sound.
   The Doctor scrambled to his feet. `Saved by the bell!
Come on!' There came a crash from behind them, and the
ringing of the bell was cut off. Leela turned and looked.
Some invisible force had shattered the egg-timer into tiny
fragments. Now great fountains of earth were being thrown
up and even the rocks themselves hurled through the air in
fragments, smashed to pieces by the invisible monster's
fury. Leela shuddered, and hurried off after the Doctor.

In the Council hut, Tomas was pleading Leela's cause to
Calib. `I tell you Neeva sent two guards in secret to kill
her.'
   Calib stood silent, considering the information. Already
his cunning mind was seeking ways to turn this incident to
his advantage.
   `Well, if you're not interested,' said Tomas angrily.
   `But I am interested. What happened?'
   `They failed. Leela killed one, I killed the other.'
   Calib nodded thoughtfully. `Neeva is beginning to make
mistakes.'
   `We must call a meeting of the Council, and tell them.'
   `Tell them what?'
   `Leela was delivered to the judgement of Xoanon. Her
sentence was banishment, not execution. Neeva has broken
his own Law.'
   `Don't be naive, Tomas.' Calib was an experienced
politician. `Even if the Council believed you, don't you
think Neeva would have an answer? He's the Speaker of
the Law. He'd say Xoanon told him to send the guards.'
   Tomas said despairingly, `There must be something we
can do.'
   `There is. Neeva has promised us victory in the next raid
across the Barrier. He says Xoanon has told him that this
time we will win. You see what that means?'
   `If we don't win...' said Tomas slowly.
   `Exactly. Neeva's going to look like the charlatan he is.
Then we can move against him--and that old fool Andor.'
There was no doubt in Calib's mind as to who was going to
be the new Chief.
   Tomas wasn't interested in Calib's intrigues. `By then a
lot of good men will have died, Calib. We should stop the
raid.'
   `Like Leela?'
   Tomas sighed. `Yes, she tried, didn't she? And by now
she's probably dead.'

Leela felt the strange tingling in the air, forced her way
through it, and came to a halt. `We can rest now. We're
safe.'
   The Doctor came to join her. `How can you be so sure?'
   `We're back inside the Boundary. Didn't you feel it?'
   `I certainly felt something,' said the Doctor. `You're sure
those creatures won't follow?'
   `They never cross the Boundary. You should know that.'
   `I keep telling you, Leela, I'm not the Evil One. Who
saved your life, eh?'
   `You did,' agreed Leela meekly. She still wasn't sure
what to make of her strange companion. He looked like the
Evil One. But why didn't he act like him? And it was
certainly true that he'd saved her life. Without him she'd
have been crushed by the invisible monsters. Perhaps the
Evil One was toying with her, saving her for some even
more horrible fate... Yet somehow Leela doubted it. She
had an instinct for danger, and sensed that the Doctor
didn't mean her any harm.
   The Doctor was looking back the way they'd come.
`Never cross the Boundary, eh? I'm sure those things don't
stay over there out of a sense of fair play. This must be a
fence of some kind.'
   `A fence?'
   `That's right. An invisible fence--for invisible
monsters!' The Doctor started poking around in the
bushes.

In the Inner Sanctum, Neeva knelt before the altar of
Xoanon. The Sanctum formed a walled-off corner of the
Council hut. It was filled with holy relics including a
selection of strange and mysterious objects arranged upon
the wooden altar. A technologically-minded person would
have recognised, among other things, a disruptor gun, a
space ship's medikit, a portable communicator, and an
ultra-beam accelerator. But to Neeva, and indeed to all the
Tribe of Sevateem, these were the holy relics of Xoanon,
their purpose, if they had one, shrouded in sacred mystery.
   Neeva knelt before the altar, head bowed, waiting for his
god to speak.
   Xoanon's voice, as always, seemed to come out of the
air. `Neeva,' it whispered eerily. `Neeva, are you listening?'
   `Speak, Lord, your servant hears.'
   `The girl Leela has returned across the Boundary, with a
companion. You have failed me.'
   `Oh great god, Xoanon, I have faithfully done all that
you have commanded.'
   `You crawling thing, do you presume to argue?'
   Neeva abased himself. `No, Lord. Forgive me.'
   `Hear this, Neeva. The girl Leela, and the one who is
with her must be destroyed. See that it is done.'
                           3
                        Captured
It took the Doctor quite a long time to discover what he
was looking for, but he found it at last, hidden beneath the
roots of a dense clump of bushes. It was a plain black box
with a rhythmically-flashing light set into the top. `Just as I
thought, a low-intensity sonic disruptor, set for a hundred
and eighty-degree spread.'
   Leela looked at the box in awe. `That keeps away the
phantoms?'
   `Gives them a nasty headache if they get too close.'
Replacing the box, the Doctor straightened up. `There
must be others set at intervals all along the Boundary.' He
looked thoughtfully at Leela. `The technology's very
advanced. So your people didn't put them there--'
   Leela made the ritual gesture of protection. `Xoanon,'
she said reverently.
   `Xoanon? Who are they?'
   `Xoanon is Xoanon. He is worshipped by the Tribe of
Sevateem. They cast me out for speaking against him. It is
said that he is held captive...'
   `Really? By the Evil One, I presume?'
   Leela nodded. `And by his followers, the Tesh.' Leela's
head was whirling with speculations. `Maybe Neeva is
right. Perhaps there is a holy purpose. I just don't know
what to believe any more.'
   `That's a healthy sign. Never be too certain of anything,
Leela, it's a sign of limited intelligence. And just where is
Xoanon supposed to be held captive?'
   Leela's reply came in a kind of ritualised chant. `Within
the Black Wall, wherein lies Paradise.'
   `Is that just religious gobbledygook? Or is there an
actual place?'
   `There is the Wall.'
  `Is there? Splendid. Show me.'
  Leela stared at him. Surely the stranger couldn't be the
Evil One, or he wouldn't need to be shown the Wall he
himself had made. Or was it all a trick? Still very much on
her guard, Leela led the way through the forest.

`Why?' demanded Andor angrily. `Why has the game
disappeared from the forest? Where is the love of Xoanon
for his people? Where is your magic, Neeva?'
   Neeva looked up at the angry figure on the throne.
`Xoanon knows that there are those amongst the Tribe who
do not wish to fight.'
   `And so he starves us?'
   `How can he bless those who do not love him? There
will be food for those who brave the Wall in his name.'
   `Men do not fight well on empty stomachs,' growled
Andor.
   Neeva's voice was calm, persuasive, totally assured.
`Soon the gap in the Wall will appear. Then you will
summon the warriors and I will speak the Litany before
the attack. I will tell you when it is time.'
   Andor waved dismissively. `Go! And do not delay too
long.'
   Neeva inclined his head--not the bow of a servant to his
king but a nod between equals--and returned to his
Sanctum. Andor watched him go, his face heavy with rage.
Always the same smooth answers, the well-rehearsed
reciting of the Law. Meanwhile the Tribe went hungry,
and there were those who plotted against him. Andor knew
that unless Neeva's promises were fulfilled, unless there
was food and victory soon, the Sevateem would demand a
new chief.
   His gloomy reflections were interrupted by Tomas who
strode abruptly into the Council hut and bowed before the
throne. `Well, Tomas?' growled Andor.
   `There is something I must say.'
   `Then say it, boy.'
   `I agree with Leela--about the attack. It's madness. It
will be just like all the other times. Many of us will die, and
we shall achieve nothing.'
   `Nevertheless, we shall attack. It is the will of Xoanon.'
   `We have only Neeva's word for that.'
   (Alerted by the mention of his name Neeva moved
closer to the door of the Sanctum.)
   Andor climbed stiffly from his throne and put a massive
hand on Tomas's shoulders. `You must have faith, my son.'
   `In the word of a murderer? Neeva sent men in secret to
kill Leela. Or did you already know that?'
   `Watch your tongue, boy,' said Andor roughly. `Don't
let me hear you speak against the attack again. We shall
strive to free Xoanon from the Tesh. And we shall do it
together, as one people.'
   Tomas bowed his head in resignation. `Yes, Andor,' he
said, and allowed Andor to lead him from the hut.
   Neeva watched them from the Sanctum. Something
would have to be done about Tomas, he decided.

The Doctor strode abstractedly through the forest, his
mind still worrying at long-buried memories. Xoanon!
Why was that name so familiar to him? He'd never been to
this planet before. Or had he?
   All at once he realised Leela had disappeared. One
minute she was beside him, the next she was gone. He
looked round. `Leela, where are you?' He heard her voice
from somewhere about knee level.
   `Doctor, get under cover. Quickly, I thought I heard
something.' Leela had hidden inside a clump of bushes at
the base of a giant tree. She crouched perfectly still,
merging with her surroundings like a wild animal.
   `Leela, we don't have time to play games.'
   `You don't understand...'
   `No, no, you don't understand,' said the Doctor
tolerantly. `Look, if they're all busy preparing for this
attack on the Wall, they're scarcely likely to send patrols
out just on the off-chance that you might come back.'
    The Doctor beamed, pleased with his own impeccable
logic, and two crossbow bolts thudded into the tree beside
him. `Of course,' he continued thoughtfully, `I could be
wrong about that!'
    From somewhere in the trees a voice shouted, `You,
stand still.'
    `Oh absolutely,' called the Doctor. Without looking
round he hissed, `Leela, I don't think they've spotted you.
Stay out of sight--and get moving.'
    `I can't leave you. They'll kill you.'
    `Go away,' whispered the Doctor urgently. He heard the
rustle of movement behind him, and a harsh voice said,
`You! Who are you?'
    `I'm the Doctor. Who are you--and why are you
shooting at me?'
    `Where's Leela?'
    `Who?' asked the Doctor innocently.
    `Spread out and search,' ordered the voice. `She must be
round here somewhere.'
    Before the warriors could obey, the Doctor said quickly,
`Would you mind terribly if I turned round? I feel a bit
silly talking to this tree.' Without waiting for a reply, the
Doctor turned. Four crossbow-carrying warriors were
grouped round him in a semicircle. As they saw his face
they instinctively fell back, each one making the ritual sign
of protection. `The Evil One,' whispered their leader.
    The Doctor started walking towards them. `Oh dear,
you too?' He lowered his voice to a blood-curdling whisper.
`Then tread softly gentlemen, or I'll turn you all into toads!
` He heard the faintest of sounds behind him as Leela
slipped away into the undergrowth.
    As the Doctor came up to the nearest warrior, the man
cowered back, again touching throat, shoulder and hip in
the sign of protection. `That gesture you all make,' said the
Doctor conversationally. `Presumably it's to ward off evil?
But do you realise it's also the sequence for checking the
seals on a Starfall Seven space suit? And what makes it
especially interesting is that none of you know what a
space suit is--do you?'
   The Doctor snatched a jelly baby from the bag in his
pocket and held it under the astonished warrior's nose.
`Now drop your weapons all of you--or I'll kill your friend
here with this deadly jelly baby! `
   But the warriors ignored the threat, levelling their
crossbows at the Doctor. `Kill him, then,' challenged the
leader. The Doctor paused. Leela should be well clear by
now. He popped the jelly baby into his mouth and said
rather indistinctly, `I don't take orders from you, my good
man. Take me to your leader.'
   It was late by the time the Doctor and his guards
reached the village. They had taken him a long,
roundabout way through the forest, and during the last
stages of the journey they had insisted on blindfolding him
with his own scarf. The Doctor had submitted without
resistance. He was determined to find out what was going
on on this strange planet, and the village seemed as good a
place to start as any.
   He knew when they'd arrived by the harsh challenge of
the sentry at the gate, the muttered replies of his guards.
He was bustled into some kind of building. `Bring it
forward,' commanded a gruff voice, and the scarf was
roughly pulled from the Doctor's eyes.
   He found himself in the middle of a huge circular hut lit
by flaring torches set around the walls. Immediately before
him was a metal chair upon which sat a grizzled warrior in
ornate ceremonial robes. (The Doctor noticed without
much surprise that the metal throne was the ejector seat of
a Starfall Seven space ship, and the Chief's regalia included
a space-sextant slung round his neck on a leather thong.)
The hut was full of savage-looking skin-clad warriors,
armed with crossbows, spears and knives.
   As the scarf fell away and the Doctor's face was revealed,
there was a gasp of horror. Undaunted by this reception, he
said cheerfully, `Good evening. I think you're all going to
be very happy I came here tonight.'
   In the rear wall of the Sanctum the point of a knife
suddenly appeared through the woven reeds of the wall.
The knife point was pulled back, leaving a small hole in
the wall. From the other side, Leela peered through it--
just in time to see Neeva adjust his ceremonial robes and
sweep out into the main hut. Despite her suspicions of the
Doctor she found she was unable to leave him to his fate.
Quickly she set to work to enlarge the hole.

The Doctor stood very still as the fantastic figure strode
towards him. But now his calm was shaken at the sight of
the complex arrangement of transparent tubing and
electronic circuitry that the Witch Doctor was brandishing
under his nose.
   `I should be careful with that thing if I were you... It's an
ultraheam accelerator.'
   Neeva sneered. `See how it fears the sacred relics of
Xoanon!'
   `There happens to be a charge in there, you could
transform this whole village into a smoky hole in the
ground.'
   `Hear how it threatens us!' chanted Neeva.
   `Why don't you just untie my hands,' suggested the
Doctor. `I've an idea what happened here. Perhaps I can
help to solve your problems.'
   `Hear how it squirms for release!' gloated Neeva. `It
cannot deceive us.'
   The Doctor sighed. `No, I can see you're a figure of
superior intellect. You're Neeva, I take it?' He looked up at
the figure on the throne. `Are you the leader of this
Tribe--or is he?'
   Andor came down from his throne. `Bring it closer,' he
ordered. Guards thrust the Doctor forward, and Andor
glared threateningly into his face. `Speak, Evil One. Will
you release our god Xoanon?'
  `Gladly, if I was holding him prisoner. But I'm not.'
There was an angry muttering from the warriors.
  Andor's hand went to the knife in his belt. `Then you
must be destroyed, so that we may release him.' Knife in
hand, he advanced upon the Doctor.
                     4
          The Face on the Mountain
Leela squeezed through the hole in the wall and moved
over to the door of the Sanctum. She looked out into the
Council hut--saw Andor advancing menacingly on the
Doctor and drew her own knife. She was about to make a
desperate attempt at rescue when she heard Neeva's voice.
`Wait, Andor. I will speak the Litany before the warriors.
Then the Evil One shall be sacrificed before them, and
they will know that victory will be ours.'
   `Very well.'
   Neeva turned away. `I shall return to the Sanctum and
prepare myself.'
   Andor turned to his chief guard. `Give the signal to
summon the rest of the Tribe, the rest of you, assemble
them outside.' The guards hurried away.
   `Don't hurry on my account,' called the Doctor. No one
took any notice.

The chief guard made his way to the centre of the village
where a huge metal panel hung suspended from a wooden
frame. Picking up the metal rod which; hung nearby, the
guard began beating on the panel, summoning the full
Tribe to assemble before the Council hut. The gong was a
sacred relic of the Old Time, and the faded lettering
stamped along the bottom edge formed the words, `Survey
Team 6'. But no one in the Tribe of Sevateem could read.

Only the Doctor, Andor and a solitary guard were left in
the Council hut now. Neeva was at prayer in his Sanctum
and the others had gone to assemble the people. The
Doctor heard the murmur of a steadily growing crowd
outside the hut. Clearly his execution was to be something
of a public event. He used the brief respite to try to talk to
the Chief. `Andor, will you listen to me! I am not the Evil
One. I'm a traveller, that's all. Your tribe has obviously
been visited by travellers before.'
    Andor backed away, as if the Doctor's words were some
terrible blasphemy. `That's impossible.'
    `Space travellers, Andor, men from some other world.
This place is littered with their equipment, the remains of
their weapons and tools. Your legend of a captive god is
obviously related to them in some way.'
    Andor turned to the warrior. `Guard it well. Do not
listen to its words, they are evil and will corrupt you.' He
turned and strode away.
    `Andor, wait,' called the Doctor. `Killing me isn't going
to help you!' As the Chief hurried from the Council hut the
Doctor added mournfully, `And it's not going to do me
much good either, is it?'

The guard stared impassively at the Doctor, tightening his
grip on his crossbow.

Neeva knelt before the altar, chanting his prayers. `And let
the Tribe of Sevateem partake of your strength oh Xoanon,
so that they may at last inherit thy kingdom. Hear thy
servant Neeva, Shaman of the Sevateem. Hear me, Xoanon,
hear my prayer!'
   Leela crouched low behind the altar. She had ducked
behind it for cover when Neeva re-entered the Sanctum,
and had been there ever since, motionless as a statue.
Despite the ache in her muscles she dared not make the
slightest movement.
   Neeva finished his prayers at last, made a final bow to
the altar and left the Sanctum. Leela emerged from hiding
and crept to the doorway. She saw the Doctor waiting
alone before the empty throne, and heard Neeva's low-
voiced conversation with the guard. `When I reach the end
of the Litany--bring it forth. You know what to do then?'
   The guard nodded, his eyes on the Doctor.
   Neeva went over to the entrance of the Council hut.
   Leela could see the Doctor's fingers hard at work on the
thongs that bound his wrists behind his back. He didn't
seem to be getting anywhere. The guard came forward
suspiciously and the Doctor beamed innocently at him.
   The open space outside the Council hut was packed.
Everyone in the Tribe was there, drawn by the astonishing
rumour that the Evil One had been captured, and was to be
sacrificed to ensure victory. Neeva raised his arms and the
excited crowd became completely silent. He began to chant
the Litany and the crowd made their familiar responses,
quietly at first then with increasing fervour.
   `Our fathers of the Tribe of Sevateem were sent forth by
our god to seek Paradise,' chanted Neeva.
   `And still we seek,' chanted the crowd.
   `They searched and found it not, but while they
searched, the Tribe of Tesh who remained at the Place of
Land betrayed our fathers.'
   `Death to the traitor Tesh.'

Inside the hut the Doctor was listening intently to Neeva's
words. Here in this strange, confused Litany was the
history of his captors, changed and garbled over generation
after generation.
   Neeva's voice came clearly from outside the hut. `The
Tesh made a pact with the Evil One and our god turned his
face from us. The Evil One raised the Tower and defended
it with the Black Wall, to aid the Tribe of Tesh.'
   The Doctor and the guard were both intent on the
Litany, though for very different reasons. Neither noticed
Leela's silent approach. Suddenly she sprang forward, and
slapped the guard on the back of his neck with the palm of
her hand.
   The guard stood quite still, staring ahead with bulging
eyes, then pitched forward on to his face.
   The Doctor turned, saw the fallen body, and Leela's
exultant grin. `How did you do that?'
   Leela held out her hand, palm upwards. The point of a
large thorn projected from between her fingers. `Janis
thorn. It paralyses instantly and death follows soon
afterwards. There's no cure.'
   The Doctor glared at her and Leela realised with some
surprise that he was angry about the death of the guard. `It
was necessary,' she explained. `Come on.'
   The chanting of the crowd outside grew louder and
fiercer. `Cursed be the Tribe of Tesh. Cursed be the Tribe of
Tesh.' Then Neeva's voice again. `And the Tribe of Tesh
stand between the Tribe of Sevateem and Xoanon, god of
their fathers. We must kill the servants of the Evil One.'
   The voice of the crowd was a maddened roar. `Kill the
Tesh. Kill the Tesh. Kill the Tesh!'
   Leela tried to pull the Doctor away but he resisted. `No,
Leela I want to listen.'
   `We haven't time to listen. He's coming to the bit about
destroying the Evil One. That's supposed to be you,
remember?'
   `You know this Litany, Leela?'
   `Of course I do, we're taught it as children.'
   `Good,' said the Doctor briskly. `Come on then, don't
dawdle.'
   Leela led him into the Sanctum and across to the gap in
the wall. From outside they could still hear Neeva's voice.
`Now is the time when the Sevateem shall rise in their
wrath and kill the Evil One.'
   `Destroy it. Destroy it. Destroy it.'
   After this resounding climax there came a silence,
caused, the Doctor guessed, by his failure to appear on cue
and take the leading role. Leela was already through the
gap, and the Doctor began struggling after her.
   A guard rushed into the Council hut, looked round and
found it empty, except for the huddled body. `It has
escaped,' he bellowed. `The Evil One has escaped! `
   The Doctor got stuck halfway and struggled desperately
to enlarge the hole.
   Neeva ran into the Council hut, more guards be-hind
him. `Find it,' he screamed. `Find it! Search everywhere! `
   The guards began running aimlessly about the hut, but
one, brighter than the rest, headed for the doorway of the
Sanctum. He pulled back the curtain and saw the Doctor
struggling to get through the hole. `It's here,' he yelled, and
rushed forward, spear raised.
   With a final desperate heave the Doctor shot through
the hole.
   The guard dived after him--and as his head and
shoulders appeared, Leela slapped him on the neck with
another Janis thorn. The guard stiffened and then
slumped. Leela grabbed the body and heaved it forward,
spreading the arms wide so it couldn't be pulled back. `Just
covering our retreat,' she explained.
   `That wasn't necessary, Leela,' said the Doctor angrily.
`Who gave you licence to slaughter? No more Janis thorns,
you understand--ever.'
   Leela gave him a puzzled look, and they set off at a run.
Since everyone in the village was milling about in front of
the Council hut, they made their way through the empty
village unobserved. Soon they were hurrying through the
dark forest.

Outside the Council hut, Andor had been told what had
happened. `It must be recaptured,' he ordered.
   It is imperative. Tomas, take four good men and search
beyond the village.'
   Tomas said, `Right, Andor,' and began selecting his men
from the crowd.
   `Quickly, Tomas,' urged Calib. He himself went through
the Council hut and into the Sanctum.
   Neeva looked up from his prayers before the altar. `Well,
Calib. Has it been re-captured?'
   `It got away.'
   `It must be captured and destroyed.'
   `Andor has sent Tomas with a search party. If they fail,
he will send others.'
   `Too late,' said Neeva impatiently. `Whatever happens,
the attack on the Wall must not be delayed.'

Leela moved swiftly through the forest, the Doctor close
behind her. `We've lost them,' gasped Leela. `We'll come to
the edge of the forest soon. We can rest there.'
   They moved on a little more slowly now, and soon the
trees began to thin out. At last they came to the forest edge.
It was nearly dawn and the Doctor saw they were on a kind
of plateau, looking across a little valley. On the far side rose
the towering shape of a mountain. The Doctor looked
across at it, casually at first, then with increasing
fascination. The mountain seemed to have a kind of shape
to it... `What is it, Leela?'
   `That's the Evil One.'
   As it grew lighter, the Doctor could see that a jutting
spur of the mountain had been carved into an enormous
face. It stared arrogantly across the valley at him. The
Doctor shook his head in astonishment. `It seems I have
been here before. I must have made quite an impression.'
   The face carved into the mountain was his own.
                            5
                          Attack
The Doctor stared across the valley. He had never been
particularly modest, but there was something rather
embarrassing at seeing one's own colossally magnified
features carved onto a mountain. `Who put it there?' he
asked. `How was it done?'
   Leela shrugged. `The Tesh did it with their magic. They
set the Face of Evil on the mountain to taunt us.'
   The Doctor nodded. Presumably the face had been
carved out of the mountain with a laser-beam. Either that,
or a few hundred years' work with hammer and chisels.
   Leela looked across at the mountain, then back at the
Doctor. `What happened when you were here before?' she
asked. `You must be able to remember!'
   `Of course I can,' said the Doctor defensively. He
hesitated. `Well, I'm trying to. One or two details are still
eluding me. Perhaps I was on some other part of the
planet.'
   `There is no other part. Only beyond the Wall.'
   `Beyond the Wall? I wonder...' The Doctor stood gazing
across the valley, lost in thought.
   `Wonder what?'
   `Sssh! I'm wondering.' He came to a decision. `Back to
the village, I think. Maybe some of those "sacred relics" of
Neeva's will jog my memory.'
   Leela was horrified. `We can't go back, Doctor. We'll be
torn to pieces.'
   `Only if they catch us,' said the Doctor cheerfully.
`Besides, they'll be too busy getting ready for their attack to
bother with us.'
   `That's what you said last time--remember?'
   The Doctor chuckled. `You mustn't expect perfection,
Leela--even from me! `
Andor glared angrily at his Witch Doctor. `I tell you the
men are afraid to attack while the Evil One is still out
there.'
   Neeva looked up at the Chief, running a hand over his
shaven head. `I have been thinking,' he said cunningly. `If
we tell them it has been destroyed...'
   `No! I will not lie to my people.'
   `Soon the Wall will open,' insisted Neeva. `We know
that it stays open for a very short time. We dare not delay.
Attack now, or we betray our god.'
   Andor tugged his beard. `Has Xoanon commanded
this?'
   `He has.' There was utter certainty in Neeva's voice.
   Andor called to the guard at the door of the Council hut.
`Guard. Sound the summons to attack.' As the guard ran
out, Andor rose from his throne. `You'd better be right,
Neeva. Servant of Xoanon or not, if we fail--I'll kill you!'
   Neeva did not flinch. `Xoanon has promised us victory.'
   `No,' said Andor heavily. `He has promised you--and
you have promised us. You will tell the warriors that it was
captured and killed in the forest.'
   The clamour of the signal gong began resounding
through the village.

Arguing furiously, the Doctor and Leela crouched in the
woods outside the village. Leela was trying to persuade the
Doctor to abandon his plans. `Returning to the village is
dangerous enough. But the shrine of Xoanon...'
   `I must examine those relics. And listen, isn't that the
signal gong?'
   Leela nodded reluctantly. `They must be preparing to
leave for the attack on the Wall. They will gather in the
square before the Council hut.'
   `Now's our chance then. Come on.' The Doctor set off
for the scattered huts at the back of the village.
   To Leela's surprise they actually managed to reach the
rear wall of the Sanctum without being seen. The hole
they'd escaped through had been hastily patched up and
there was a large gap at the edge. Holding up his hand for
silence, the Doctor listened at the gap, and Leela did the
same. From the Sanctum came the low mumble of Neeva's
voice. `Oh great god Xoanon, speak that I may know thy
will.'
   They peered through the hole. Neeva was still kneeling
before the altar. `Speak, Xoanon, speak!' Neeva paused, and
seemed to be waiting expectantly.
   A guard appeared in the doorway. `Shaman Neeva, it is
time to leave.'
   `I am coming.'
   `Chief Andor asked that you do not delay.'
   `I said I'm coming!' The frightened guard fled. Neeva
waited a moment longer, then got reluctantly to his feet.
He took off his space-suit cloak and arranged it on a special
stand. From another stand he took a different cloak, this
one made from lengths of plastic tubing and strips of
electric cable. He placed a glove-like hat on his head and
left the Sanctum.
   The Doctor and Leela had watched all this through the
gap. `I like the hat,' whispered the Doctor. `Very fetching.'
   `That is the Hand of Xoanon,' said Leela reprovingly.
   `That is an armoured space-glove, or what's left of one.'
The Doctor started wrenching the repair-patch from the
hole.

Outside the Council hut, the warriors were gathering.
Their mood was sullen and rebellious, and Andor and
Neeva were doing their best to whip them into a state of
enthusiasm. `The attack must begin at once,' roared Andor.
   Neeva joined in. `Soon the Wall will open. Xoanon has
spoken. Now that the Evil One is dead, we cannot fail!' He
began to chant the Litany. Reluctantly at first, then with
increasing fervour, the warriors gave their responses. Soon
the familiar ritual had them in its spell and their eyes
blazed with anger as they shouted their hatred of the Tesh.
The Doctor ripped aside the last of the matting and
squeezed through the hole. Leela followed him. Once
inside the Sanctum the Doctor headed straight for the
altar. He began to examine the sacred relics of Xoanon,
handling them with a familiarity which made Leela
shudder.
   The Doctor looked up and said thoughtfully, `You
know, I had the distinct feeling that Neeva expected an
answer to that prayer of his.'
   `Wouldn't be much point in praying if he didn't.'
   The Doctor smiled. `I've met theologians who'd give
you an argument on that. No, I mean he was listening.'
   The Doctor picked up a plastic tube packed with
complex circuits and pressed a switch in its side. `Hello,
transgalactic operator, hello!' He listened for a moment
then tossed the tube aside. `Nothing. Dead as a Dalek.'
   Leela stared at him. `Why did you speak to that tube?'
   `I thought I recognised it.' The Doctor was gazing
abstractedly round the Sanctum and his eyes fell on the
space-suit cloak on its stand. He crossed over to it and
began fiddling with the controls set inside the helmet.
   A voice from inside the helmet said, `Neeva! Neeva, is
that you?'
   Leela was terrified. She dropped to her knees, making
the sign of protection.
   The Doctor was almost equally surprised. Not just
because of the voice--he'd been hoping for a reply from
the transceiver inside the helmet. What astonished the
Doctor was the fact that the voice he heard was his own!
   `A hot line to god,' he murmured. `Lucky old Neeva.'
He looked down at Leela. `Don't be afraid, it's only a
machine for sending voices over long distances. If that is
Xoanon speaking, then he isn't a god. Gods don't need to
use machines.'
   Still a little fearful, Leela straightened up. `Are you
certain?'
   `Of course I am. Aren't you?'
   `Yes,' said Leela hesitantly. `Yes, I suppose so.' `That's
better.'
   The voice spoke again. `Neeva! Neeva! `
   The Doctor said politely, `I'm sorry, Neeva isn't here at
the moment. Can I take a message?'
   There was a long silence. Then the voice chanted, `At
last we are here. At last. At last. Us! `
   `Us?'
   `You. Me. Us,' crooned the voice. `At last I shall be free
of us.'
   `Who are you?' demanded the Doctor.
   The voice was surprised. `Don't I know?' The
transceiver clicked off, and there was silence.
   Leela looked at the Doctor. He was standing like
someone in a trance, staring wide-eyed into the distance.
`Leela, I'm beginning to get a very nasty idea...
   `What idea?'
   The Doctor seemed to be talking to himself. `Something
I did? It seems like it...'
   `What are you talking about?'
   `Who did that voice remind you of?'
   `You? Yes that's it, it was your voice. How could that
be?'
   `More to the point, who could that be? I think it's time I
took a look at this Wall of yours.'

Andor was leading the warriors of the Sevateem along the
forest path that led to the Wall. Beside him marched Neeva
in his Shaman's robe. Andor glanced over his shoulder at
the file of warriors behind him. A pitiful handful they were
too, he thought. The Sevateem were dwindling year by
year. Hunting accidents, famine, disease, and above all the
endless futile attacks upon the Wall had reduced their
numbers to a few grizzled warriors together with the boys
who had just attained manhood. Much more of this and
Xoanon would have no Sevateem left to worship him. Still,
this time it was going to be different. This time they were
going to storm the Wall, rescue Xoanon, and bring about
an age of endless peace and prosperity for the tribe. Andor
was doing his best to make himself believe that Neeva's
prophecies would all come true. But his heart was full of
dread as he led his men along the trail.
    Tomas appeared ahead, running back towards them.
    `I saw the Wall,' he gasped, as he came up to them.
Andor gripped his arm. `Was there a gap?'
    Tomas nodded. `It is as Neeva prophesied! The gap is
there! It's like before--a sort of shining tunnel.' `How
wide?'
    `Big enough for three men, perhaps four.'
    Andor tugged his beard. `I still don't like it.'
    `You think it's a trap?'
    Neeva came forward. `Xoanon is fighting on our side.
Even though he is held captive, he has summoned all his
power to make the gap, so that we may rescue him. Unless
we attack now his powers will fade and the gap will close.
Xoanon would not lay traps for his people.'
    `The Tesh might,' said Andor stubbornly. `Or the Evil
One.'
    Tomas looked at him in surprise. `Neeva told us that the
Evil One has been destroyed.'
    Andor glanced quickly at Neeva. `Yes, that's true. So it
has.' He came to his decision. `Come, we've wasted enough
time. I'll lead the main attack. You take the left flank,
Tomas, Calib the right.' Andor raised his hand and the
little column began to move forward.

In a distant part of the forest. the Doctor had reached
another part of the Wall. He stood gazing thoughtfully up
at it, Leela by his side. It was an astonishing sight, a sheet
of pure true blackness, a nothingness, stretching in all
directions. To the left, to the right, and high above them
there was the same dead blackness. The forest seemed to
border it on either side.
   `It's a Time Barrier,' said the Doctor softly.
   `I don't understand.'
   `The principle's very simple. You just move every-thing
inside the barrier forward a couple of seconds. The result is
your Wall--a barrier completely impervious to all forms of
energy. I've seen it done as a parlour trick, but never on
this scale.'
   `Is there any way to get past it?'
   `Only one. It can be bridged from within, by whoever
set it up.'
   Leela told him of the gaps that appeared in the Wall
from time to time, of the always-futile attacks made by the
Sevateem in their attempts to rescue the captive god
Xoanon. `Andor and the others are about to attack again at
some other part of the Wall. But if what you say is true,
they're walking into a trap. Can't we warn them?'
   `Too late,' said the Doctor sadly. `The attack will be
starting at any moment. Anyway, they wouldn't listen.'
   `Calib might. He's more intelligent than the others--
more open-minded. Come on, Doctor. Let's try.' She
looked pleadingly at him, and after a moment the Doctor
nodded. They turned away from the blackness of the Wall
and headed back to the village.

Andor and his warriors crouched at the edge of the forest.
Just as Tomas had reported, a kind of radiant tunnel had
appeared in the blackness of the Wall. It stretched
temptingly ahead of them. The gateway to Paradise.
   Andor drew a deep breath then rose to his feet. `Attack!'
he yelled. `Come on all of you. Attack! `
   Warriors at his heels, Andor dashed forward. There was
no planning, no strategy, just a headlong charge. As the
Sevateem followed their Chief into the tunnel, Neeva stood
at the edge of the forest, arms held high in prayer. `Protect
your warriors, oh Xoanon. Strengthen their arms so that at
last they may free you.'
   Suddenly a fierce white light blazed from the mouth of
the tunnel, swallowing up Andor and his warriors. Yelling
and screaming they disappeared into its radiance,
brandishing spears and firing crossbows.
    Tomas turned to his men. `Attack!' he yelled, and led
his warriors in a charge. `Come on, Calib.'
    As Tomas and his warriors dashed into the blinding
radiance, Calib's men looked fearfully at him. Calib stood
watching silently. He made no attempt to lead his men to
the attack.
    A high-pitched electronic howl filled the air, and all
round the tunnel men twisted and fell. Soon the air was
filled with the screams of the dying. The tunnel began to
close...
                        6
                 Danger for Leela
Hands plunged deep into his pockets the Doctor stood
waiting in the middle of the empty Council hut. Leela was
by the entrance, keeping watch. A solitary figure appeared
and she ducked back out of sight. `He's coming, Doctor,'
she hissed. `I told you Calib would survive if anyone did.'
   Calib came wearily into the hut--and stopped in
astonishment at the sight of the Doctor.
   The Doctor beamed. `Ah, there you are, Calib. I was just
thinking about you.'
   Calib stood warily, crossbow in hand. `So Neeva and
Andor lied to us.'
   `I wouldn't be surprised. By the way Leela's just behind
you.'
   Calib whirled round. Leela was by the doorway covering
him with her crossbow. `Ah,' he said thoughtfully, and
stood very still. Leela made an impatient gesture and Calib
put down his crossbow on a nearby bench.
   `How was your battle?' asked the Doctor.
   `Like the last time.'
   Leela looked at him in anguish. `Another massacre?'
   Calib nodded wearily. `There was this blinding light,
and a terrible noise. Then the Wall closed up. We never
even saw the Tesh, and more than half the men were
killed.'
   `But not you,' said Leela flatly. `You seem unhurt.' Calib
shrugged. `There's no particular virtue in dying, Leela.'
   Leela's voice was scornful. `That depends on what you
do to avoid it.'
   `Now, Leela,' said the Doctor. `Let's not quarrel. I'm
sure Calib is a reasonable man. After all, we came here to
talk to him.'
   `What do you want of me, Doctor?' asked Calib
curiously.
   `We need someone's help--and Leela thinks it might be
yours.'
   Calib looked distrustfully at Leela. `Why me?'
   Leela moved closer to him. `The Tribe is in desperate
danger, Calib,' she said urgently. `The Doctor is the only
one who can help us. We've got to convince the others he's
not the Evil One.'
   `Having convinced you first, of course,' added the
Doctor.
   `I don't think you're the Evil One--I never have. I don't
believe in evil spirits.'
   `I'm impressed,' said the Doctor. `It looks as though
Leela was right about you.'
   Calib strolled closer to Leela, ignoring the threatening
crossbow. `If I'm to help you, I'll need to know everything
you've discovered.'
   The Doctor frowned. `Well, there isn't much time...
Leela showed me this Wall of yours, and in my opinion...'
   Calib's hand flashed out and Leela staggered back.
   Calib snatched the crossbow from her weakening grasp.
As she fell, Leela stretched out a hand to the Doctor, as if
in appeal. An ugly black shape was embedded in the back.
   `What have you done to her?' shouted the Doctor.
   `Janis thorn. Something you hadn't thought of, Doctor.'
   The Doctor started moving towards Leela. Calib made a
threatening gesture with the bow. `Stay where you are!'
   `I thought you were being convinced a bit too easily.'
   `Oh, I meant what I said, Doctor. I don't believe you're
the Evil One--but the others do. Neeva said you'd been
destroyed, and here you are. Just the evidence I need to
break him.'
   `Leela underestimated your ambition,' said the Doctor
softly.
   `It's for the good of the Tribe.'
   The Doctor looked down at Leela. `Naturally. And this
too?'
   `She might have tried to stop me,' said Calib simply. `I
said stay where you are!'
   `You need me alive--remember?' The Doctor knelt
beside Leela and began feeling her wrist for a pulse. `Calib,
you held back! You cost us the attack!' Calib turned.
Tomas stood in the doorway, battle-stained, weary, and
very angry.
   Suddenly the Doctor threw himself backwards and
swung his legs round in a sweeping arc, that knocked
Calib's legs from under him. Calib tried to get up but the
Doctor was already on his feet. Snatching the crossbow
from Calib's hands he stood towering over him, and spoke
without looking round. `Come in, whoever you are. Who
are you by the way?'
   `Tomas. What's happened to Leela?'
   `Calib here poisoned her with a Janis thorn. Up you get,
Calib.'
   `I think you've broken my leg.'
   `I'll break your nose if you don't get up,' said the Doctor
savagely.
   Calib struggled to his feet, looking at the Doctor's
crossbow. `It takes skill to use one of those things.'
   `What, at this range? All it takes is a flick of the wrist.
Now, pick Leela up and carry her in there.' The Doctor
nodded towards Neeva's Sanctum. `Tomas, you help him.'
   Tomas and Calib carried Leela into the Sanctum and
the Doctor pointed towards a low bed in one corner. `Put
her on there. Gently, now.'
   They lowered Leela on to the bed. `What are you going
to do?' asked Calib.
   The Doctor looked at Tomas. `Tomas, you don't want
her to die, do you?'
   `Of course not.'
   `Then keep him covered for me. I need time to work.'
   The Doctor passed the crossbow to Tomas, and began
examining the sacred relics on the altar.
   Tomas looked a little bemusedly at the bow in his hands
and Calib took a step towards the door. Tomas raised the
bow to cover him. `I wouldn't do that, Calib.'
   `Don't be a fool, Tomas, I'm going to give the alarm.'
   `Back against the wall!'
   Calib looked hard at him, realised he wasn't bluffing,
and moved away from the door.
   Tomas shot a quick glance at the Doctor, who was still
rummaging ruthlessly through the sacred relics. `What are
you doing, Doctor?'
   `Ah, here we are.' The Doctor looked up. `This is a
space-ship's medikit, Tomas, and this is a bioanalyser. If I
can identify the poison, I can programme the medikit to
make an anti-toxin.'
   The medikit was a small oblong box with a row of lights
and a control keyboard set into the lid. Tomas watched as
the Doctor removed a strip of clear plastic from a holder at
the back, plucked the Janis thorn from the back of Leela's
hand, and rubbed the poisonous tip of the thorn on to the
strip. He fed the strip into a slot in the side of the machine.
There was a whirring sound and the lights on the medikit
began flashing in a complicated sequence. The Doctor
studied them for a moment, took a second poison-smear
from the thorn, feeding this one into the slide-tray of the
bio-analyser, a kind of miniature electron microscope. He
peered into the eye-piece for a moment, gave a grunt of
satisfaction, went back to the medikit and punched out a
complicated series of numbers on the keyboard.
   Lights began flashing on, and soon the lights on the
display panel were burning steadily. All except one, which
was still flashing. The Doctor studied the keyboard for a
moment, then punched in more instructions. The light
flashed for a moment longer, then burned steadily like the
others. `Got it,' said the Doctor triumphantly. The little
machine began a satisfied whirring. `Well, come on, come
on,' said the Doctor impatiently.
   Calib said mockingly, `What do you suppose he's doing,
Tomas? You don't really believe he can help Leela by
poking around in Neeva's relics!'
   The Doctor kept his eye on the machine. `Shut up,
rattlesnake,' he said abstractedly. `I'm trying to save time.
Leela hasn't much left.'
   Tomas looked down at Leela. She lay perfectly still, eyes
wide open and staring. `I think it's too late, Doctor. She's
already dead.'
   The medikit gave sudden triumphant buzz and a little
tray popped out of its side. In the tray lay a small plastic
syringe.
   The Doctor snatched it up, crossed to Leela and
injected the anti-toxin into her arm. For a moment
nothing happened. Seeing that the Doctor and Tomas had
their eyes fixed on Leela, Calib began sidling toward the
door. The Doctor leaned over Leela and slapped her hard.
She twitched and stirred. Then she blinked, and her eyes
began to focus. `Doctor?' she said dazedly.
   Suddenly Tomas realised. `Calib's gone. He must have
slipped out while--'
   `Watch the door,' ordered the Doctor. He helped Leela
to sit up. `Are you all right?'
   `I seem to be. I ought to be dead, though. There's no
cure for the Janis thorn.'
   `Oh yes there is. Just a question of finding it.'
   `Do you know the answer to everything?'
   `Of course,' said the Doctor. `Answers are easy. Asking
the right questions is the tricky part.'
   From the doorway Tomas called, `They're coming,
Doctor.'
   The Doctor looked at Leela. `Can you walk?'
   `I think so. My arm hurts a bit.'
   `That'll wear off. Tomas, you take Leela out the back
way.' He pointed to the hole in the wall. `I'm staying with
you,' said Leela firmly.
   `You're going with Tomas,' said the Doctor, even more
firmly. `I'll see you both later.'
   Before they could argue, he strolled calmly through into
the Council hut.
   Since the Doctor's capture was now inevitable, Tomas
saw no reason to delay. He grabbed Leela and dragged her
towards the hole.
   As the Doctor came out of the Sanctum, Calib ran in,
guards behind him. `Good evening, gentlemen,' said the
Doctor breezily. `I thought you'd never get here. Good
Heavens, look at that! ` His eyes widened and he stared
over their shoulders.
   It was the oldest trick in the world, but Calib and the
others fell for it. They whirled round. By the time they had
realised there was nothing behind them and turned back,
the Doctor appeared to have vanished.
   `Over here, gentlemen,' said a cheerful voice from above
them. They looked up. The Doctor was sprawled
comfortably on the Chief's throne. `Now then, shall we get
down to business?'
   The guards ran to the throne and surrounded it,
covering the Doctor with their crossbows. He looked
round at the circle of fierce, unfriendly faces. `You know, I
shall begin to think you don't like me!'
   Neeva hurried into the Council hut, pushed through the
ring of guards and stared malevolently at the Doctor.
   The Doctor smiled. `Ah, Neeva, is it really you? They
told me you were dead. Or was it the other way round?'

Tomas squeezed through the hole and turned to help
Leela. As she emerged and straightened up, warriors came
out of the forest and surrounded them.
   Andor limped forward. `Neeva was right. You're both in
league with the Evil One.'
   `You blind fool,' began Tomas. Andor turned away.
`Seize them,' he ordered.
   The warriors closed in.
                       7
             The Test of the Horda
It was becoming quite a lively debate, thought the Doctor.
The Council hut was packed with the survivors of the raid,
and everyone else in the village who could squeeze in.
Andor was presiding from his throne, Neeva and Calib
beside him. The Doctor, Leela and Tomas stood before the
throne. All three had their hands bound in front of them
with leather thongs.
   A grizzled old warrior had stepped out of the crowd to
challenge Neeva. `You lied to us,' he accused. `You said it
was destroyed.'
   An angry roar from the crowd showed how many of the
warriors supported him.
   Calib said smoothly, `Answer them, Neeva. Tell them
what happened.'
   Neeva held up his hands for silence. `Did it not bring
the witch its servant back to life? I tell you it was
destroyed--but it renewed itself.'
   The Doctor decided to join in. `If you believe that,
you'll believe anything. Leela isn't a witch--and I'm not
the Evil One.'
   `You wiped out our attack,' charged Andor.
   `Piffle. I was nowhere near.'
   `That's true,' shouted Leela. `I was with him all the
time.'
   Neeva turned angrily on her. `Ha! Will you believe the
words of this witch?'
   The Doctor said calmly, `The attack failed because it
was a trap, right from the start.
   `And who could have laid such a trap?' sneered Neeva.
   Leela's voice rang through the Council hut. `Xoanon!'
There was a moment of appalled silence, then a roar of fury
from the crowd. They surged forward menacingly, and
Andor's guards actually had to raise their spears to hold
them back. Leela heard Tomas whispering in her ear, `A
great mistake, saying that!' Listening to the angry crowd
Leela felt he might well be right.
   `They must all be destroyed,' screamed Neeva. `Totally
destroyed this time. Throw them to the Horda.'
   `What is a Horda anyway,' asked the Doctor plaintively,
but no one answered. Leela shuddered.
   Calib was addressing the crowd. `Wait! I do not believe
this is the Evil One.'
   There was a mutter of astonishment from the crowd.
Leela edged closer to the Doctor. `Conscience?'
   `No, politics. Calib wants to break Neeva's hold on the
Tribe. If he can prove Neeva wrong about a religious
matter like this...'
   `Listen to me,' shouted Calib. `If he can be killed, then
he's not the Evil One--because the Evil One is a god.'
   `Good point,' said the Doctor appreciatively. `Fifteen
love.' Leela looked blankly at him. The ancient Earth game
of tennis meant nothing to her.
   Neeva pointed dramatically at the Doctor. `The Litany
says it can be destroyed.'
   The Doctor was still keeping score. `Fifteen all! `
   Calib glared challengingly at Neeva. `I say we should put
this Doctor to the Test and see if he speaks truly.'
   Andor intervened. `The Test is for mortals.'
   `If he can be killed, then he is a mortal.'
   The Doctor chuckled. `Game, set and match to Calib, I
think!'
   Leela looked wonderingly at him. How could he be so
cheerful when he'd just been condemned to an agonising
death?

The Pit of the Horda was in a screened enclosure on the
outskirts of the village. It was a sacred place, a place of
terror. It was the Place of the Ordeal.
   The pit was very large, oblong in shape, covered by two
stone shutters. In the centre of the shutters, at right angles
to the line where they met, was carved a long shallow
trough.
   The area around the pit was enclosed with wattle
screens. In one of them was a small window-like opening.
Through it could be seen an enormous rock, suspended
high in the air from a rope, which ran up to a huge wooden
derrick. Beside the pit itself was a large lever in a wooden
framework. Taut ropes ran from the lever and disappeared
behind the screen.
   The Doctor stood by the pit, looking keenly around
him, trying to work out the meaning of this strange and
complicated set-up. Presumably the hanging rock was a
counter-balance, to open the shutters... Leela and Tomas
were beside him. Their hands were still bound, though the
Doctor's had been freed in preparation for the Ordeal.
   Calib and Andor were there too, and a small group of
Tribal Councillors and guards. Only Neeva was absent. On
his defeat by Calib, he had stalked into the Sanctum in a
huff, presumably to take counsel with Xoanon.
   The Doctor looked around the assembled audience.
`Well, let's get on with it, gentlemen.'
   At a nod from Calib, who seemed to be in charge of the
proceedings, a guard came forward with a wicker basket.
He tipped the contents onto the ground and jumped back
hurriedly. The Doctor looked down. There at his feet was a
white, snake-like creature, rather like a giant slow-worm. It
was wriggling lethargically. `So that's a Horda. Doesn't
look too formidable. What am I supposed to do, fight it or
eat it?'
   Calib took a spear from a guard and poked at the Horda
with the butt. The creature reared up and struck at the
spear-haft with incredible speed, locking onto the wood
with rows of savage teeth.
   Calib held up the spear. The Horda hung for a moment
by its teeth, then realising that the wood wasn't good to
eat, released its hold and dropped to the ground and lay
quiet.
    `They'll strike at anything that moves except each
other,' said Calib. `Ten of them can strip the flesh from a
man's bones before he can cry out.'
    `And I take it there are rather more than ten of them in
there?'
    `The pit is full of them,' said Calib. He nodded to a
guard who came forward with a long narrow plank. He laid
it in the trough across the shutters. It fitted exactly.
    `You stand on that,' explained Calib.
    `And then what?'
    Calib pointed to the suspended boulder. `The stone is
lowered, the shutters begin to open, the plank be-comes a
bridge.'
    `And what do I do?'
    `To survive, you must break the rope--with this! ` Calib
took a loaded crossbow from the nearest guard and handed
it to the Doctor.
    The Doctor took the crossbow, and immediately the
surrounding guards trained their own weapons upon him.
He weighed the crossbow in his hands, looking at the pit,
the plank, and the hanging boulder.
    `Doctor listen,' said Leela urgently. `The rope gets
thinner the further it goes down, but it moves faster tool'
    One of the guards struck her savagely across the face.
`Silence, witch! He does it alone.'
    `Who is that man?' asked the Doctor mildly. Calib
stared at him. `Which man?'
    `That one,' snapped the Doctor. Snatching the spear
from Calib's hand he used it to flick the Horda at the
guard. It fastened itself to the man's clothes and he fled
screaming through the crowd. `Whoops, sorry,' said the
Doctor apologetically. He strolled to the centre of the
plank and stood waiting. `Well?'
    Andor raised his hand. `Let the Test of the Horda
begin.'
    A guard pulled a lever and the massive boulder began its
slow descent. Soon it disappeared from sight behind the
screen.
    Slowly the stone shutters began to draw apart. The
plank became a bridge--but a bridge over a steadily
increasing gap. As the gap widened a whispering, rustling,
hissing noise could be heard--the sound of many living
creatures in constant motion. The Doctor glanced down.
The pit below him was filled with a seething mass of
Horda.
    As the gap beneath the plank became wider and wider,
the plank began to sag and creak. The Doctor realised that
if the gap became too wide the plank would snap beneath
his weight.
    It was an interesting problem, he thought. If he fired too
soon, the rope would still be too thick to be broken by the
crossbow bolt. If he left it too late, the plank would snap
and he would fall into the pit. The Doctor looked through
the screen window at the rope. As Leela had warned him, it
was getting steadily thinner, but it was moving fast too...
just a little longer...
    The sight of the Doctor balanced calmly on the plank,
crossbow not even raised to fire, was too much for Leela.
Perhaps he was paralysed by fear... For the moment
everyone's eyes were fixed on the Doctor. Leela kicked the
feet from under the nearest guard and made a determined
dash for the control lever, tugging at it with bound hands.
An angry guard shoved her away, and she fell headlong. He
tried to pin her down but Leela rolled over, shot out her
legs and sent him flying. She jumped to her feet--to find
herself surrounded by more guards, their crossbows aimed
at her heart. Leela lowered her hands and stood very still.
Meanwhile the Doctor, apparently undisturbed by all this,
was still balancing calmly on the plank, which by now was
sagging more than ever..
    Just as it seemed about to snap, the Doctor raised his
crossbow and fired. The bolt sped through the screen
window, severing the rope. The shutters stopped opening,
and the Doctor walked carefully along the plank towards
the edge of the pit. He had almost reached safety when
there came an ominous, splintering sound. As the plank
broke in two, the Doctor made a desperate flying leap, just
managing to land safely on the edge of the pit.
   He tossed the crossbow to a guard and gave a little nod
of self-congratulation. `Very good, Doctor, very good!' He
smiled at Leela. `It was nice of you to try and help me but
there was really no need.'
   `Where did you learn to shoot like that?'
   `Like what?' The Doctor glanced at the screen window,
where the severed rope still dangled. `Oh, like that! I was
taught by a rather charming Swiss chap. His name was
William Tell! `
   The Doctor tapped a guard on the shoulder. `Would you
untie my friends please?'
   The guard looked at Calib for confirmation, and Calib
snapped, `Untie them.'
   The guard severed Leela's and Tomas's bonds, and the
Doctor smiled round at the watching group. Calib and
Andor stared silently at him, and the guards were looking
at him almost in awe. It was obvious that very few survived
the Test of the Horda. The Doctor guessed that his success
had given him some kind of status, at least for a time.
Better make use of it while it lasted. `Shall we go?' he
suggested cheerfully. Before anyone could stop him, he
marched confidently off to the Council hut.
   Confused and frightened, Neeva was on his knees before
the altar. In his ears rang the angry voice of Xoanon.
`Neeva! Neeva, where is he?'
   As the Doctor entered the unseen entity seemed to
become aware of him. `Doctor? Doctor, are you there?' The
voice was that of a young man.
   `Yes, Xoanon, I'm here.'
   At the sound of the Doctor's voice, the voice of Xoanon
changed. It became deeper, more mature, and the Doctor
realised he was hearing his own voice. `Doctor, we have
decided...' Suddenly the voice changed, became youthful
again--'To destroy you!'
                        8
                  Beyond the Wall
The Doctor stared thoughtfully at the space-suit, hanging
scarecrow-like on its stand. He was dealing with some kind
of multiple personality, he decided. Or to put it more
simply, his unseen opponent was raving mad.
    The Doctor decided to humour him. `I see. Tell you
what, Xoanon, why don't we meet and talk things over?'
    His own voice replied. `We are together. We have said
all there is to say, and know all there is to know.'
    `Perhaps so. But we don't want to do anything hasty, do
we?'
    `Hasty?' Then the youthful voice again. `It's been an
eternity! I'm turning off the Boundary, to let in my pets
from the Beyond. Goodbye, Doctor! `
    A click and then silence.
    `What does it all mean?' whispered Neeva.
    `Trouble,' said the Doctor. `Large, deadly and invisible.'
He lifted the disruptor gun from the altar and studied it
thoughtfully.

Deep in the forest, on the Boundary, the light on top of the
hidden sonic disruptor the Doctor had discovered began to
flash more and more slowly. Fin-ally it stopped altogether.
All through the forest the same thing was happening to the
other disruptors in their hiding places. The Boundary was
no more. The village of the Sevateem lay open to attack by
the invisible monsters from Beyond.
   In deference to Neeva's feelings, the Doctor had carried
a pile of equipment, selected from Neeva's holy relics, out
of the Sanctum and into the main Council hut. He had
found a set of tools, and was using it to check over the
long-disused disruptor gun. Leela crouched beside him, a
willing if baffled assistant. `Screwdriver,' said the Doctor,
pointing. Leela took the little tool from the kit and passed
it to him.
    As the Doctor made a final adjustment, Tomas came
rushing in. `We've set guards all round the perimeter,
Doctor. The village has been warned. Every-one knows
what to expect.'
    The Doctor went on working. `You've explained about
their attraction to vibration?'
    `Of course.'
    The Doctor studied the jumble of technological
equipment. `We're lucky the space travellers brought so
much equipment with them. Let's hope we can profit from
their misfortune.'
    `Space travellers?' said Leela, puzzled. `I don't
understand.'
    The Doctor pointed to some letters stencilled on the
tool box. `PLANETARY SURVEY TEAM. That's where
your tribe got its name. Survey Team--Sevateem.' The
Doctor rubbed his chin. `Question is--were you lot here
before they arrived?'
    Calib entered in time to hear the Doctor's last re-mark.
`I see what you mean, Doctor. Are we their captors--or
their descendants?'
    `You catch on quickly, Calib. Whoever they were, the
travellers certainly didn't get back to base.' The Doctor
paused for a moment, as if haunted by some fugitive
memory. Then, shaking his head, he returned to his work.
    Calib said impatiently. `When will the weapon be
ready?'
    The Doctor looked up, noticing the tone of command.
`Are you taking charge, Calib?'
    `Do you object?'
    Leela's hand flashed to her knife. `I object.'
    `Leela,' said Calib patiently, `I don't expect you to like
me...'
    `Then you won't be disappointed. You tried to kill me--
remember?'
    `That is a thing to be settled between us. But now is not
the time.'
    The Doctor straightened up. He handed the disruptor
gun, not to Calib but to Tomas. `Here, you take this.'
    Tomas took it reluctantly. It was hard to accept that this
holy relic was in reality a deadly weapon. `How does it
work?'
    The Doctor indicated the firing button. `Just point and
push! It's destructive up to about ten times bow range. Use
it in short bursts, the power-charge will last longer.'
    `Thank you, Doctor.' Holding the weapon carefully in
front of him, Tomas left the hut.
    The Doctor turned his attention to yet another piece of
equipment.
    `What is it, Doctor?' asked Leela.
    `A stasis-beam generator. As soon as I've checked it
over, we'll go and set it up.'
    `Where?'
    `On the Boundary, of course. Every little helps...'

Leela kept a wary eye on the forest, while beside her the
Doctor made final adjustments to the generator. All her
senses were alert. The forest was silent. Perhaps the
invisible monsters hadn't yet realised that the Barrier had
been switched off. While she waited, Leela was sharpening
her knife on a sliver of stone.
    The Doctor stood up. A light was flashing on the top of
the stasis-beam generator. `There! That'll keep Xoanon's
little pets away from this part of the perimeter at least.
Now, we've got to find a way to get inside that Time
Barrier--and soon.'
    `It is hopeless, Doctor. The Old Ones tell us that the
Tribe has been trying to get through the Barrier for
generations.'
    `I could build a time bridge of course,' said the Doc-tor
musingly. `But I'd have to dismantle the TARDIS, and
even then it might not work...'
   `Doctor, didn't you say that nothing could go through
the Barrier?'
   `That's right.'
   `Not even light, or sound?'
   `No.'
   `But Xoanon is inside the Barrier?'
   `Yes.'
   `Then how do we hear his voice?'
   The Doctor jumped to his feet. `You're a genius, Leela.
A genius!'
   `I am? What did I say?'
   `Never mind that. Come on.'
   The Doctor hurried back towards the village, and Leela
followed. They dashed through the forest, through the
village, across the Council hut and into Neeva's Sanctum.
   Neeva sat on his sleeping platform staring vacantly into
space. `Neeva,' called the Doctor.
   There was no reply. The Doctor shook him. `Come on
man, snap out of it.'
   Slowly Neeva's head turned and he stared vaguely at the
Doctor. `Yes, Master, what is your will?'
   `Neeva, when you hear the voice of Xoanon, is it always
when you're at the altar, with the vestment hung on its
frame?'
   `Yes, Master.'
   `Have you heard it anywhere else?'
   `Yes, Master.'
   `Where?'
   `Yes, Master.'
   The Doctor realised that Neeva was responding parrot-
like, almost without thought. On a sudden inspiration, the
Doctor moved away from Neeva, closer to the space-suit.
Cupping his hands over his mouth he intoned, `Neeva,
Neeva! This is Xoanon.'
   Neeva seemed to respond. `Yes, Master, what is your
will?'
   `In what places have you heard my voice?'
   `Only here, Master. Here in your Sanctum.'
   The Doctor nodded, satisfied. `You have been a good
and faithful servant, Neeva. Go back to sleep--now!'
   Neeva stretched out on his sleeping-platform and fell
instantly into deep sleep.
   Leela stared wonderingly. `What's happened to him?'
   `Too much, too quickly,' said the Doctor. `He's in a state
of shock.' The Doctor stood for a moment, staring into
space. `It's a tight-beam transmission, Leela. it must be.'
   `What does that mean?'
   `It means there is a bridge through the Barrier--and I
know where it is...'

The guard was very frightened. He had been summoned by
Tomas, told that the Boundary had vanished, and ordered
to patrol this stretch of the perimeter. He had lived all his
life under the shelter of the Boundary, and the thought
that it was no more petrified him. Ever since he was a
child, he had been told of the horrors of the Beyond.
    There was a rustling noise in the trees ahead. Leaves
and branches started moving as something huge, invisible
pushed them aside. There was deep, hoarse breathing.
With a yell of sheer terror, he turned and fled.
    When the man on duty at the warning gong saw the
guard running towards him from the forest, being smashed
and trampled into the ground by some vast, invisible force,
he reacted instinctively. Grabbing his metal rod, he
hammered frantically on the gong.

The Doctor and Leela were heading away from the village
when they heard the clamour of the gong.
   `The fools,' said Leela fiercely. `We warned them.'
   `I imagine somebody panicked.'
   `They'll just attract the creatures to the village!'
   `We can't help them now, Leela. It's up to Tomas and
the disruptor gun. Come on, time's running out.' They ran
on through the forest.
The guard was still beating frantically on the gong when
Andor ran up and wrested the metal rod away from him.
`Stop that, you idiot. You'll attract more of them.'
   The guard pointed. `Something killed one of the guards.
I saw it, it's coming towards us from the edge of the forest.'
   Andor was growing old, but he was still a chief. `Come
on, Tomas, we must warn the other guards,' he said, and
set off towards the forest.
   All was silent as they reached the forest edge and moved
past the crushed body of the guard. Andor started to move
forward into the trees.
   `Andor, be careful,' called Tomas. `It must be still
about.' Suddenly the bushes close to Andor began
thrashing furiously and there was a savage roar.
   `Look out,' yelled Tomas, but he was too late. Some vast
invisible force gripped Andor, sweeping him off his feet as
though snatched up by invisible claws.
   Tomas ran in as close as he dared, raised the disruptor
gun and fired.
   There was a crackle of power and a scream of rage and
pain from the invisible monster, as it flung Andor to the
ground. As it retreated the creature was momentarily
visible, outlined in a vivid yellow glare of light.
   Tomas caught a glimpse of a giant face. It was hideously
distorted--but unmistakably the face of the Doctor.
   Tomas ran to Andor, who lay crumpled on the ground,
his body shattered by the impact of his fall.
   Tomas knelt beside him. `Andor! Andor!' he called.
   For a moment Andor raised his head. `Xoanon, save
me,' he muttered weakly, and fell back, dead.
   There came a shattering roar of anger, and the trees
began tossing once more. Tomas looked up, realising that
the monster must be rushing back towards him.
   He raised the disruptor gun, fired a rapid burst, then
turned and fled back towards the village.

The Doctor and Leela had crossed the valley by now. They
stood at the foot of the mountain, staring up at the great
carved head.
   `The nose should be a shade more aquiline,' said the
Doctor judiciously. `And the classic proportion of the brow
hasn't been perfectly executed. Still we mustn't complain,
we live in an imperfect universe.'
   Leela said practically. `Where's the bridge through the
Barrier, then? Up the nose?'
   `Certainly not. It's over the teeth and down the throat.'
They started to climb.
   A long, weary time later they stood directly beneath the
enormous chin. The Doctor perched on a boulder, leaped
and clung, hauling himself over the rampart of the giant
teeth. Leela followed him, and he pulled her to safety.
They stood up and looked around. They were in a kind of
irregular tunnel, leading downwards. It stretched for a
considerable distance, with a gleam of light at the end.
   `Odd feeling, this,' said the Doctor.
   `What is?'
   `Standing in your own throat! `
   Leela and the Doctor moved cautiously forward. They
were some way down the tunnel when there was a junction,
and from it a light was moving towards them.
   What is it?' whispered Leela.
   The Doctor put a finger to his lips for silence.
   They waited silently as the light came nearer. A hulking
distorted shadow appeared on the wall.
                         9
                      The Tesh
`Tomas! Tomas, over here.'
   Tomas checked his panic-stricken rush through the
forest and listened. Calib appeared from behind a tree-
trunk, and Tomas went over to join him.
   `I heard the noise,' whispered Calib. `What was it?
   `The Evil One,' gasped Tomas. `It was huge... It killed
Andor.'
   Characteristically, Calib's first thoughts were of his own
advantage. `Then I'm leader now.'
   `And where will you lead us, Calib?' Before Calib could
reply Tomas said, `Listen!' There was a trampling sound
deep in the forest behind them. They could see tree-tops
waving and hear deep, hoarse breathing. `That thing's on
the move again.'
   Calib looked at the heavy disruptor gun in Tomas's
hands. `But the weapon worked?'
   `It revealed the Evil One's face, and drove it away--for a
time.'
   Calib's mind was busy with his new responsibilities.
`We must get back to the village. If we move quietly it may
pass us by.'

The Doctor and Leela watched the distorted shadow come
closer.
   `What is it?' whispered Leela again.
   `There's only one way to find out.' Keeping flat against
the wall they edged along until they could see down the
side-tunnel. An extraordinary figure was moving slowly
towards them. It wore some kind of all-over protective suit
with helmet and gauntlets. Instinctively Leela raised her
crossbow, but the Doctor put a restraining hand on her
arrn.
    The figure stopped and turned. For a moment it stood
facing a stretch of blank tunnel wall. It took a sudden pace
forward, and suddenly it was bathed in green light. Then it
vanished.
    Leela gave a gasp of astonishment. `It's gone? Where did
it go?'
    She ran forward to look at the patch of wall. The Doctor
went on past her, down to the other end of the tunnel,
where light was pouring through the far entrance. For a
long time the Doctor stood staring at the view of the world
beyond the Barrier.
    He was looking out on to arid rocky plain, illuminated
by the harsh glare of the planet's two suns. In its centre
stood a huge rocket ship, its harsh, functional lines
sweeping skywards like a great tower of steel. `Now I
remember,' breathed the Doctor. `The Mordee expedition.
And I thought I was helping them! ` He stood as if in a
trance as the memories flooded back into his mind.
    Leela's voice broke into his reverie. `Doctor, what are
you doing? Why don't you come and help me find the
Tesh?'
    Slowly the Doctor walked back along the tunnel. `Tesh?
How do you know it was a Tesh? Have you ever seen a
Tesh?'
    Leela was bemused by the barrage of questions. `Its skin
was loose and shiny, as we were told. And it had two heads,
one inside the other.'
    `That was a protective suit. Must be a different
environment in there.' The Doctor took a step forward, a
green light bathed his body and he disappeared.
    Leela jumped back terrified, making the sign of
protection. The Doctor's impatient voice came through the
wall. `Come on, then! `
    `How can I? It's a solid wall.'
    `Nonsense, it's an illusion. It's called a psi-tri projection,
a three-dimensional image which deceives the eye. Close
both eyes, take one step back, then just walk forward.'
   Leela shut her eyes tightly, and obeyed. She moved
forward expecting every minute to crash into the wall.
Instead, she bumped into the Doctor. She opened her eyes
to find herself in a small metal-walled chamber, the Doctor
beside her. Leela stared round in-credulously. `Great
Xoanon, where are we?'
   `It's called an anti-grav transporter. It'll take us to the
ship in no time at all.'
   The capsule vibrated slightly, and began to move...

Inside the swirling chaos of light that was the fragmented
mind of Xoanon, voices were speaking. Male and female,
young and old, together and separate, they blended into an
ecstatic chorus. `We are here. We are returned. Now we
shall be one. We are here. We are returned. Now we shall
be one. Now we must destroy us. Now we must destroy us
and become one.'
   The voices rose to a frenzied chant. `Now we must
destroy us and become one... one... one!'

The capsule stopped, a door slid open, and the Doctor and
Leela emerged. They found themselves in a short metal
corridor. It ended in another door, which also slid open
before them. The Doctor stepped confidently through, and
Leela followed, crossbow at the ready.
   They were in the main control room of the space ship,
but a control room which had been fantastically
transformed. Instrument consoles were draped with
elaborately decorated tapestries, monitor screens garlanded
with flowers, like the idols in some jungle temple. Joss
sticks and ceremonial candles burned be-fore rows of
controls.
   `It's a shrine,' whispered Leela,
   `I'm afraid so... It seems the Tesh are as ignorant of their
origins as your own people.'
   `And what are their origins?'
   `How does the Litany go? The bit about Paradise, I
mean.'
    Leela stared at him, and the Doctor said impatiently,
`You said you learned it as a child. You said you knew it...'
    `I do, I do...' Leela began to recite. `The Sevateem were
sent forth by god to seek Paradise. The Tesh remained at
the Place of Land...'
    `Well, there you are. In other words, the Sevateem
explored the planet, the Tesh stayed to work on the ship in
the place where it landed. Here.'
    Leela struggled to take it all in. `Then we're the same
people?'
    `That's right. The Tesh were the technicians and the
Sevateem were the survey team. You're all human beings
from this colonist ship.'
    `Then what happened to us, Doctor? What happened?'
    `I'm afraid I did.'
    The Doctor stood staring into space, remembering. It
had been somewhere near the beginning of that business
with the Giant Robot. The Doctor had just undergone his
latest regeneration. The early days of a new incarnation are
always a tricky period for a Time Lord, and in this case the
process had been hurriedly accelerated in order to save his
life. He had been in a confused, irresponsible state, his new
personality still not fully established. Even now his
memories of those first days were hazy. There had been
Sarah, and the Brigadier, and the problem of the Robot to
grapple with... And all the time there had been this
overwhelming urge to go off into the TARDIS and just
disappear. One night the urge had been too strong and the
Doctor had given way. He had sped off alone in the
TARDIS to another time and another planet--this planet.
He had found the colonists in trouble, repaired their
computer with careless expertise and gone on his way--
leaving, he now realised, a terrible legacy behind him.
Since the TARDIS had returned him to Earth within
minutes of his departure, no one ever knew that he'd been
away.
   Indeed, he himself had almost forgotten the strange
dream-like interlude. But somehow his unconscious mind
knew--and it had brought him back to this planet to undo
the harm he had done.
   Vaguely the Doctor became aware of Leela's voice.
`Answer me, Doctor. What did you do?'
   `I misunderstood what Xoanon was.'
   `Is he a human being?'
   `At the time I didn't realise he was a being at all.' The
Doctor flicked dials on a nearby console. `These
instruments are dead...'
   `What did you think Xoanon was?' persisted Leela.
   Before the Doctor could answer, a strange figure
appeared from the rear of the control room. He was tall and
thin, white-haired with a thin, lined face. The simple robes
he wore gave him the air of some kind of priest. He bowed
and smiled. `Welcome, Lord.' His voice was soft and
gentle.
   The Doctor looked curiously at him. For all his mild
manner there was a feeling of tremendous power about this
man. Power rigidly controlled, held in check. Despite the
quiet voice and the friendly smile, he had the fierce,
burning eyes of a fanatic.
   The man took another step forward. Instinctively Leela
raised her bow to cover him.
   At once the man's face changed, becoming hard and set.
He stared coldly at Leela. Suddenly she found her muscles
locked in the grip of some invisible force. Fighting every
inch of the way she sank slowly to her knees.
   The Doctor grabbed the man by the shoulder, and
shook him. `Will you please stop doing that?'
   The man pulled away from the Doctor and Leela
slumped to the ground.
   The Doctor ran to her and knelt by her side. She was
quite unconscious. He heard the calm voice of the stranger.
`She is not damaged. My acolytes will attend to her.'
   Two more men, both wearing similar robes, both with
the same fanatical look about them, came into the control
room, picked up Leela and started to carry her away. The
Doctor moved to block their path. `Where are they taking
her?'
    `She will be tended. We recognise her value, Lord.'
    His tone was calm, and utterly sincere. Reassured the
Doctor let the men take Leela off. He turned and the
newcomer knelt at his feet, head bowed.
    With some embarrassment the Doctor said, `Er, have
you dropped something?'
    `I do you honour, Lord of Time. We have waited long
for your return.'
    `I see,' said the Doctor thoughtfully. `Well, thank you
for the honour, but it's really information I need at present.
Do get up.'
    The man raised his head, but did not rise.
    The Doctor looked down at him. `What's your name?'
    `I am Jabel, Lord, Captain of the People of Tesh.'
    The Doctor realised that his questions would have to be
framed in a way that Jabel could accept and understand.
`Tell me, Jabel, do your people have a holy purpose?'
    `Yes, Lord,' said Jabel proudly. `We serve Xoanon and
tend the holy places. We guard this Tower against the
Savage. We deny the flesh that our minds may find
communion with Xoanon.'
    The Doctor began striding about the control room. `Yes,
there's a sort of logic. Outside the Barrier physical courage
and strength. Inside, paraphysical development, the sort of
mental power you used on Leela. Selective breeding--it's
an experiment in eugenics! `
    `Yes, Lord,' agreed Jabel meekly.
    The Doctor stopped his pacing, realising that Jabel was
still on his knees. `Oh do get up, that floor must be very
hard. Did no one ever tell you kneeling stunts your
growth?'
    Slowly Jabel rose. His eyes were troubled, as if somehow
the Doctor wasn't quite what he'd expected.
    `Now then, Jabel,' said the Doctor briskly. `Do you
know where Xoanon is?'
    `Yes, Lord.'
    `Where?'
    `He is in no one place, Lord. He is all around us,
everywhere.'
    The Doctor sighed. `So you don't know. I didn't think
you did.'
    `You and he are as one, Lord. You will show us the
Way.'
    The Doctor was in no mood for mysticism. `Do you
know what a computer is?'
    `No, Lord,' said Jabel, still with the same infuriating
calm.
    The Doctor began ripping the ornamental draperies
from the control panels. `I've got to find that thing before
it kills us all.'

When Leela recovered she was lying on a metal table in a
metal-walled room. Above her was suspended an elaborate
array of sinister-looking apparatus. She struggled to get up,
and found herself fixed to the table by metal clamps. A low
electronic hum came from the instruments above her, as if
machinery was warming up. There was a low chime, and a
calm female voice said, `Final warning, final warning.
Particle analyser has entered terminal phase countdown.
All personnel please clear the area.'
   Leela struggled wildly, but the metal clamps held her
fast.

The Doctor rampaged round the control room, testing
keyboards and switches in vain. `This whole control room
has been disconnected. On a ship this size it could take me
days to find the central complex.' He looked at Jabel again.
If he could frame the question in a way that Jabel could
understand...
   `I must be slipping,' he muttered to himself. `Jabel,
where is the holy of holies?'
    `All of the Place of Land is holy.'
    `There must be somewhere on this ship where no one's
allowed to go. A kind of Inner Sanctum.'
    `Yes, Lord,' said Jabel promptly. `The Sacred Chamber.'
    The Doctor gave a sigh of relief. `Yes, that's what I
mean. Where is it?'
    `On level thirty-seven, Lord.'
    The Doctor's fiddling with controls had not been
entirely without result. A monitor screen had come to life.
On it he could see Leela, strapped to a metal table. `What's
going on? What are they doing to her?'
    `Particle analysis, Lord. We shall reduce the subject to
its constituent parts.'
    `But that will kill her! `
    `Yes, Lord. But she is only a Savage.'
    `That's not a good enough reason!' Frantically the
Doctor began hunting for an off button for the analyser.
    Jabel stared at the Doctor in puzzlement, unable to
understand his concern. `At intervals the Savages have
power to open the Barrier. The particle analyser may tell us
how they do it. Surely that is why you brought her to us?'
    `The Savages don't open the Barrier, you lack-brain,'
said the Doctor furiously. `Xoanon does. Do you
understand? Xoanon! `
    For the first time Jabel showed emotion. `You lie! `
    `Give the order to stop that particle analyser,'
commanded the Doctor.
    `You are not the Lord of Time, come again to save us!'
    `Will you give that order?'
    `No! You are a blasphemer, an impostor.'
    The Doctor began groping in his pockets. `Right then,
I'll go and deal with it myself.'
    He was turning to leave the control room when Jabel
fixed him with a sudden fierce stare. The Doctor went
down, as if struck by a heavy club.
    small metal mirror in the palm. `To be strictly accurate,
it broke itself. Luckily this was already in my hand when
Jabel knocked me out. All I did was reflect the power back
with it. Still, I don't suppose the owners will see it that
way. We'd better be off!'
                        10
                   The Summons
An urgent voice was shouting in the Doctor's ear. `Doctor,
Doctor, please wake up!' He opened his eyes to find
himself strapped to a metal table next to Leela.
    A danger light was flashing on the wall beside them, and
a countdown clock showed there were only seconds to go
before the machine would dissolve them to constituent
particles, killing them in the process. Leela saw the Doctor
twist round frantically, aiming something in his hand at
the battery of lights and projectors above them. The last
second of countdown ticked away, and a fierce ray of light
beamed down on them from above. There was a sudden
explosion, a shower of sparks, the machinery above them
went dead, and the clamps holding them to the table
sprang open.
    A little gingerly the Doctor sat up. `Be thankful you're
living and trust to your luck, and march to your front like a
soldier,' he said solemnly. `Kipling--or was it Gertrude
Stein? Someone like that, anyway.' He helped Leela down
from the table.
    She looked up unbelievingly at the charred and twisted
machinery above them. `I think you've broken it. How did
you manage that?'
    The. Doctor held out his hand and showed her a small
metal mirror in the palm. `To be strictly accurate, it broke
itself. Luckily this was already in my hand when Jabel
knocked me out. All I did was reflect the power back with
it. Still, I don't suppose the owners will see it that way.
We'd better be off!'

Jabel stood waiting in the control room. Gentek, his chief
acolyte, entered and bowed low. `They have escaped,
Captain,' he said calmly. All display of emotion was
forbidden amongst the People of Tesh.
   With equal calm Jabel said, `They must be found and
killed. This will take precedence over all other duties and
devotions.'
   Gentek bowed again. `Then he is not the Lord of Time,
the One Who Will Return?'
   `He is our enemy and the enemy of Xoanon. Kill him--
and the Savage.'
   Gentek bowed again, Jabel returned the bow, and the
acolyte left the control room.
   Jabel moved slowly over to the nearest console. His face
remained calm and composed--then suddenly he smashed
his fist down on to the console.
   The sudden flare of emotion over, he resumed his
measured pacing of the control room.

The Doctor and Leela ducked back out of sight as an
acolyte armed with a blaster hurried past the end of the
corridor.
   `He seems to be looking for something,' said the Doctor.
   `Us?'
   `Very probably.'
   `Doctor, you didn't finish telling me. What is Xoanon?'
   `A machine that became a living creature. An
omniscient computer with acute schizophrenia--not a very
pretty thought, is it? And all my fault.'
   `How is it your fault?'
   `When I was here before, the Mordee were having
trouble with their new computer. I repaired and re-
programmed it for them. Unfortunately I forgot to wipe my
personality prints from the data core... or did I really
forget? I forget if I forgot or not...'
   `You're not making yourself very clear, Doctor.'
   `Well, I wasn't quite myself at the time. It may just have
been my own egotism. Anyway, now the computer has a
split personality, and part of it is mine. Now, is that clear?'
   `No,' said Leela.
  `Oh well, never mind. Let's get moving again.' As they
moved away, a sensor in the wall glowed brightly.

In the glowing sphere at the centre of Xoanon's brain was a
picture of the Doctor and Leela moving away down the
corridor. `Us within us,' crooned Xoanon softly. `Soon we
shall make two, one.' There was a peal of mad laughter.

It was very dark in the forest, and the air was full of the
screams of dying men, and the bellowing of invisible
monsters. Moving quietly through the darkness, Tomas
lifted the disruptor gun and fired at the nearest sound.
There was a scream of pain and the invisible creature
retreated. Tomas fired again, and the gun went dead. He
had used the weapon once too often. Its power-charge was
exhausted. Tossing the gun aside, Tomas ran to find Calib,
who was hiding nearby. `The gun is useless now, Calib.
The power's used up.'
    `Well, at least we've drawn them away from the village.
Now we must fall back. Get the men moving, Tomas--and
quietly.'

The Doctor led Leela down yet another corridor, pausing
by the open door of a small room packed with electronic
equipment. Lines of monitor screens covered one wall,
storage cupboards and lockers the others. He beckoned to
Leela. `Come in and shut the door.'
   Leela obeyed. `Where are we?'
   `Auxiliary Communications Room and Stores,' said the
Doctor briskly. `I imagine Xoanon keeps an eye on
everything. Let's see what's going on outside.'
   The Doctor's hands flickered over the controls and
suddenly one of the screens lit up. It showed Calib, Tomas
and a handful of warriors making their way back towards
the village. Close behind them the trees were shaken by the
movement of the huge invisible monsters.
   `Look, it's near the edge of the village,' whispered Leela.
`And the phantoms are still chasing them. They must have
got through from the Beyond.'
    `Looks like it,' said the Doctor sadly. `I didn't expect
that stasis-beam to hold them forever. They're projections
from the dark side of Xoanon's id. Tremendously
powerful, with enough kinetic energy to kill!'
    Leela made for the door. `I'm going back! `
    `Don't be absurd. What do you think you can do?'
`We've got to do something to help! `
    The Doctor said. `Xoanon won't let his creatures cross
the Time Barrier. Your friends will be safer inside, if I can
arrange it.' He began studying the controls.
    `What about the Tesh?'
    `I didn't say they'd be safe--just safer.' The Doctor
flicked another switch. `Neeva! Neeva! Wake up, Neeva!'
    To Leela's astonishment Neeva's voice came through a
nearby speaker. `Yes, Master?'
    `Neeva,' said the Doctor impressively, `this is Xoanon.'
    `What is your will, Master?'
    `Tell Calib to lead the people through the mouth of
the--the head carved on the mountain.'
    `Through the mouth of the idol, Master? Will Calib
believe that this is truly your command?'
    The Doctor thought for a moment. `You will say these
words to him: "I don't believe in ghosts either." `
    ` "I don't believe in ghosts either," ` repeated Neeva.
    `That's right. Go now and do my will.'
    `Yes... Doctor,' said Neeva's voice. Then there was
silence.
    The Doctor grinned. `I underestimated that man! And
now, Leela, we've got an appointment on level thirty-
seven.'

Gentek came into the control room and bowed before
Jabel. `They cannot be found.'
   `Continue the search.'
   Gentek bowed again and turned to leave, but Jabel
called him back. `Gentek! Is the guard posted outside the
Sacred Chamber?'
   `Yes, Captain.'
   Gentek left the control room. Jabel stood waiting
calmly, trusting in the will of Xoanon.

The Doctor and Leela emerged from a lift and hurried
along yet another featureless metal corridor. `This is level
thirty-seven,' said the Doctor. `If I've counted right, that
is!'
    The corridor led to another wider one. They peeped
round the corner and saw a set of massive steel doors,
guarded by a Tesh with a disruptor gun. He looked alert
and wary. There was no chance of getting past him unseen.
    They dodged back out of sight. The Doctor considered
for a moment, took off his hat and handed it to Leela. She
looked puzzled, then gave a delighted smile. Luring an
enemy into an ambush was just the sort of thing she liked.
    Conscious of his great responsibility, the Tesh guarding
the Sacred Chamber looked keenly up and down the
corridor. He heard a whispered `Psst!' and swung round,
gun at the ready. A strange black object appeared round
the corner for a second, at about the height of a tall man. It
remained visible for a few seconds then drew back out of
sight. `Aliens!' thought the guard excitedly. He would win
great praise from Jabel if he destroyed them.
    Cautiously he crept towards the corridor junction, eyes
fixed on the spot where the black shape had appeared.
When he was near enough he sprang round the corner, gun
raised to fire--and saw only blank wall. He saw a flicker of
movement below his eye level, and realised too late that his
enemy was crouched down low. He caught a brief glimpse
of a skin-clad Savage and lowered the gun to fire.
    Ducking under the gun, Leela caught the astonished
Tesh by the sleeves of his robe, bent, twisted and threw.
The Tesh hurtled over her shoulder, his head thudding
into the corridor wall.
    The Doctor picked up his hat, dusted it carefully and
put it back on his head. He picked up the gun and handed
it to Leela. `Keep watch?'
    `Can't I come with you?'
    The Doctor shook his head. `Xoanon's--well, un-stable,
to put it mildly. He might kill me--and he'd certainly kill
you. Anyway, we need someone on guard.'
    The Doctor went up to the great doors and touched a
control. The doors slid silently open. He passed through,
and they closed behind him.
                          11
                        Xoanon
Calib and Tomas were climbing up to the mouth of the
giant head on the mountain.
   Neeva's message had been received with doubt and
suspicion. Most of the Sevateem thought it was a trap
devised by the Evil One.
   By now the invisible monsters were rampaging through
the village smashing the flimsy huts to fragments. Most of
the Tribe had fled into the forest and were crouching
motionless and silent in whatever hiding-places they could
find.
   Besides Neeva himself, only Calib and Tomas had been
willing to obey the message. Tomas because he had hopes
of finding Leela again, Calib because he was staking
everything on this final gamble. If he could lead the
Sevateem to victory his hold on the Chieftainship would be
assured.
   Only a handful of warriors could be persuaded to
accompany them. They were waiting now with Neeva,
beneath the head of the idol, while Calib and Tomas
scouted ahead. Calib had little taste for putting himself in
danger--but he knew that a show of heroism was needed to
impress his people.
   Calib clambered over the great stone teeth, and turned
and pulled Tomas up beside him. He drew a deep breath.
`Well, the tunnel's here, let's take a look.' They moved
cautiously down the long tunnel, Calib in the lead.
Suddenly the figure of a Tesh appeared from the darkness
ahead. He wore the sinister-looking protective suit, and the
disruptor gun in his hands was raised to fire. Calib stood
frozen in terror.
   `Calib, look out! ` yelled Tomas. Calib jumped aside,
Tomas's arm flashed down, and a heavy knife thudded into
the heart of the Tesh. He gasped and slid silently down the
wall. Calib darted forward and snatched the gun. He
turned to Tomas, who was recovering his knife. `Keep your
eyes open. Where there's one Tesh there's likely to be
more.'
   From the forest below them there floated the distant
sound of shattering trees, and the roar of the invisible
monsters.
   `The creatures are catching up with us,' said Tomas
worriedly. `We've got to get the men inside the Barrier
quickly.'
   `All right. Go back and get them moving, Tomas. I'll
wait here.' Clutching the disruptor gun, Calib stared
nervously into the darkness ahead.

For a moment the Doctor stood in total darkness. A
pattern of swirling multicoloured lights appeared in the
darkness ahead of him, and he began walking slowly
towards them. As he moved forward he began to hear
voices, thousands of them it seemed, chattering,
whispering, screaming. Gradually the voices seemed to
blend, to merge into one compelling voice that filled the
darkness all around him, coming from nowhere and from
everywhere. `Who are you? Who are you? Who are you?'
demanded the voice.
   The Doctor shouted. `I'm the Doctor!'
   There was instant silence. The lights disappeared, and
the Doctor was plunged into darkness again. Then a harsh
white beam shone from the darkness, seeming to fix him to
the spot where he stood.
   `Who are you?' said another voice. It was a woman's
voice, soft and gentle.
   `Who are you?' said the voice of a young man.
   `Who are you?' said a third voice--and the Doctor knew
it was Xoanon's voice. Yet it was his own voice too. `I am
the Doctor,' he repeated.
   `Why have you come, Doctor?'
   `To correct a mistake I made when I was here long ago.'
   `We have made no mistake.' The voice split and
fragmented again, tuning into a kind of chorus. `No
mistake... no mistake... no mistake...' chanted the voices
eerily.
   `I made the mistake,' said the Doctor. `When the ship
first landed here, the new experimental computer failed. I
thought the data core must have been damaged in the
landing. So I renewed it by using a direct link with the
compatible centres in my own brain.'
   `The Sidelian memory transfer,' said Xoanon's voice.
   `A variation of it, yes.'
   `Good, very good,' said Xoanon approvingly.
   The Doctor was about to go on when the personality of
Xoanon split once more. `How did he find the ship?'
demanded the youthful voice.
   `Sssh,' reproved the female voice. `Don't interrupt,
you'll spoil the story! `
   The Doctor groaned inwardly. When Xoanon's
concentration wandered, his personality split into its
divergent parts. It was like holding a conversation with an
unruly crowd--a crowd of madmen.
   `This isn't a fairy tale,' shouted the Doctor. `It actually
happened. And it's vitally important to you, Xoanon.
You've got to listen to me.'

Leela knew that it wouldn't take long for the Tesh to find
her, and when the first head appeared, round the corner,
she was ready. She fired a rapid burst, and the head
disappeared.
   Leela considered her position. She was in a kind of
blind alley, the doors to the Sacred Chamber at her back.
There were only two places an attack could come from, the
far end of the main corridor, and the junction point with
the smaller corridor to her right, where she had just shot
down the Tesh.
   Another Tesh appeared at the far end, and Leela fired
instantly. He fell, another Tesh appeared round the nearby
corner and she fired again. `Three down,' she thought
exultantly. Full of the joy of battle, she waited, scanning
the corridor ahead.

Screwing up his eyes against the blinding light, the Doctor
continued his attempt to communicate with the rational
part of Xoanon's personality. `The computer was a new,
experimental model. For generations teams of technicians
had worked on it trying to extend its power. Finally,
without realising it, they had created life. The computer
hadn't failed at all. It had evolved the first of a completely
new species.'
   `A new species?' said the youthful voice mockingly. `Oh,
come now, Doctor!'
   Xoanon's attention was slipping again, and the Doctor
increased the urgency in his voice. `Yes, a new species.
When I came, it was still in shock. I simply didn't
recognise the birth trauma--that was my mistake. When I
connected my brain to the new-born creature, it didn't just
take compatible information as a machine would have
done. It took everything!'
   `Fascinating,' said Xoanon politely. `May I ask a
question?' The voice changed, answered itself. `Sssh, let
him finish,' said the youth.
   Determinedly the Doctor went on. `When the computer
woke it had a complete personality. Mine. It thought I was
itself--until it began to develop an-other separate self--its
own self. That was when it started to go mad.'
   `And where is it, Doctor?' said Xoanon's voice, in a tone
of polite enquiry. `Where is this poor, mad, mad machine
creature?'
   The Doctor drew a deep breath. Was Xoanon stable
enough to accept the truth? `It's here, Xoanon. I'm talking
to it. It's you.'
   There was a moment of silence. The beam of light
dimmed slowly until at last the Doctor found himself once
more in darkness. `Xoanon?' he called softly. `Xoanon?'
   The youth's voice spoke. `I grow tired,' it said sulkily. `I
will think you no longer, Doctor.'
   `No, wait, Xoanon,' shouted the Doctor. `I'm the
Doctor. I am real. I am separate. You must acknowledge
me.'
   `I will not think you,' screamed the voice. `We are
Xoanon.'
   `You are Xoanon, and I am the Doctor.' He shouted it
again and again, in an attempt to force Xoanon to accept
the reality of his existence. `I am the Doctor! I am the
Doctor! I am the Doctor!'
   `No,' screamed Xoanon. `No! No! No!'
   A tiny spot of light appeared in the distance. It
expanded and came closer, became a face. The Doctor's
own face, distorted with rage and hate.
   In a hundred different voices Xoanon screamed his fury,
his determination to deny the Doctor's very existence.
`No,' howled the maddened voice. `No, no, no, no, no! `
   The face came nearer and nearer, grew larger and larger.
Soon it was enormous, filling the entire chamber, eyes
bulging, mouth twisted in a scream of terror.
   The Doctor felt the storm of madness swirl round him,
swallow him up. He buried his face in his hands to escape
the terrifying sight, but there was no escape. There was
nothing in the universe but the face and voice of Xoanon.
   The Doctor collapsed, writhing in agony, the voice of
Xoanon filling his brain. `Who am I? Who am I? WHO
AM I?'
                         12
                      The Trap
Leela's enemies were too many now for her to risk trying
to pick them off one by one. Instead she laid down a steady
barrage of fire, sweeping corridor end and corner
alternately, forcing the enemy to keep their heads down all
the time.
    It was an effective enough method, but it had one big
disadvantage--as Leela realised when her disrupter gun
stuttered and died. She had exhausted the charge.
    She tossed down the gun, drew her knife, and waited.
After a moment a Tesh head appeared cautiously round the
corner. When there was no shot from Leela, the head
appeared again. More Tesh appeared, and still more. They
advanced steadily towards Leela, covering her with their
guns. She wondered why they didn't shoot and get it over
with. Perhaps they'd been ordered to take her alive. Well,
they wouldn't find it easy. It would cost a few Tesh lives
before they subdued her.
    The Tesh came steadily onward, Leela crouched, knife
in hand, poised to spring--and the lights in the corridor
flickered.
    The Tesh halted, looking uneasily at each other. The
lights flickered again, and then went out. In the darkness
Leela heard cries of fear and the sound of panic-stricken
retreat. Other lights came on, dim reddish ones, and Leela
saw that the Tesh were fleeing down the corridor. She ran
forward and sprang, bringing down the nearest before he
could get away. To her astonishment he made no attempt
to struggle. Instead he remained crouching face-down, his
hands over his face.
    Leela sheathed her knife, snatched the gun from his
unresisting hands. `Tesh! What is happening?' She
prodded him with her foot.
   The Tesh made no reply. Leela dropped to one knee and
shoved the gun close to his ear. `Answer, while you still
have a head to answer with! `
   The man was moaning with fear. `It is the Light of
Failsafe!'
   `What does it mean?'
   `The end of the world!'
   `Why?' She jabbed him with the gun. `Why Tesh?'
   `It means death and destruction. It happened before, at
the Time of Land.' He crouched low, moaning with fear.
   Leela turned away contemptuously. `Cowering down
there won't help you.' She decided it was time to find the
Doctor. Touching the control, she went through the great
steel doors.
   Immediately she was assailed by a barrage of lights and
sound. Xoanon was still screaming his agonised question.
`Who am I? Who am I? Who am I?'
   The Doctor writhed on the floor, hands over his ears,
trying in vain to block out the sound of Xoanon's voice.
The huge distorted vision of the Doctor's face hung in
mid-air like a demon mask.
   Leela brought up her gun and fired, and the demon face
exploded in a swirl of colours. All at once there was
darkness and silence.
   Leela groped her way towards the Doctor who lay out
on the floor, apparently unconscious. Grabbing him by the
shoulders she started lugging him towards the door.
   As she dragged him along, swirling lights appeared in
the darkness and there was a low babble of voices. Xoanon
was coming back to life.
   As they came into the corridor the Doctor came to life
as well. Leela helped him to his feet, and he was able to
stagger the last few steps. The door closed behind them
and he leaned thankfully against it, gasping for breath.
   Leela looked at him in concern. `Are you all right,
Doctor?'
   `I think so. Are you all right? What happened to you?'
Leela told him of her battle with the Tesh, and its
unexpected end. The Doctor said, `Xoanon's little tantrum
must have triggered off the Ship's emergency procedures.'
   `Was that Xoanon--that thing that looked like you?'
   `Yes, part of him. Everything behind that door is
Xoanon. You were inside him. Most powerful computer
ever built.'
   `Why was he trying to hurt you, Doctor?'
   `He's insane,' said the Doctor simply.
   `What will he do now?'
   `I imagine his first impulse will be to kill me. That will
be more important to him than anything else.'
   `Why does he hate you so much?'
   `I contradict what he thinks is real. I'm a threat to his
world.' The Doctor straightened up and looked round.
`Still the emergency lighting and something else...' He
sniffed. `A smell of... a smell of a smell!'
   Leela sniffed too. `There is something. It seemed to
come from the corridor wall.' She reached out her hand,
but the Doctor knocked it away. `Don't touch that!'
   He fished an old Roman denarius from his pocket and
tossed it against the metal wall. There was a bright blue
flash and a crackle of sparks. `Xoanon must have shorted
the main power circuit through the walls.'
   (Further down the corridor, the terrified Tesh was still
crouching where Leela had left him. Suddenly he tensed,
then rose slowly to his feet. He began walking along the
corridor towards Leela and the Doctor who were studying
the electrified wall.)
   `As traps go, a bit haphazard,' said the Doctor. `I'd have
expected something more positive...'
   The Tesh flung himself at him, seizing him by the
throat. The sudden ferocity of the attack took the Doctor
completely by surprise, and he fell back choking. He
recovered and tried to break free, but his attacker had
super-normal strength. He also had a definite purpose.
Slowly but surely he was dragging the Doctor towards the
electrified wall.
   `This really isn't necessary,' gasped the Doctor. `Tell
you what, I've got a wonderful idea...'
   Not daring to fire in case she hit the Doctor, Leela
threw down the gun, and tried to drag the Tesh away.
   He gave her a savage blow in the stomach, and she fell
back gasping. The Tesh returned to the struggle with the
Doctor, dragging him to the ground. They rolled over and
over, coming closer and closer to the wall. Clearly the Tesh
had no objection to sacrificing his own life in order to kill
the Doctor.
   Inches away from the wall, the Doctor managed to
wriggle beneath his attacker. He gave a desperate heave.
   The Tesh thudded into the wall and died in a blaze of
blue sparks.
   The Doctor struggled to his feet and looked sadly down
at the body. `Why wouldn't he listen...'
   `He acted like one possessed by a demon.'
   `Yes... I'm afraid Xoanon's just warming up. When he
gets desperate enough he's going to destroy every-thing,
just to get at me. There's not much time.'
   The Doctor hurried off down the corridor. Picking up
the disrupter gun. Leela followed. As they moved off, the
red lights dimmed and the lighting returned to normal.

At the far end of the tunnel through the giant, head, Calib,
Tomas, Neeva, and a handful of warriors stood gazing out
at the world beyond the Barrier. Like the Doctor before
them they saw a barren plain and a towering space ship.
   Tomas said reverently. `At last, we're here.'
   Calib smiled wryly. `And I always believed it was only
legend...' Neeva came forward to join them, staring
intently at the rocket ship. He began reciting from the
Litany. `The gates of Paradise shall be open to the people
of Xoanon, and his dwelling place revealed.'
   Tomas looked sharply at him. `We've outgrown the old
superstitions, Neeva.'
   `But it's there, isn't it, Tomas,' said Neeva. `We start
getting proof, and we stop believing.'
   `When there's proof you don't need to believe.'
   Calib interrupted them. `Get the men ready, Tomas.
We're going to climb down there and capture that Tower.
This is one attack that isn't going to fail. I wish Andor
were here now to see us destroy the Tesh.'
   `The Tesh--and Xoanon.' Neeva's eyes glittered
feverishly, and there was hysteria in his voice. `Xoanon is
our real enemy. He betrayed me--and I'm going to kill
him.'

The Doctor led Leela back to the auxiliary control room,
closing the door behind them. He began fishing through
the various lockers and cupboards, pulling out an
astonishing variety of electronic spare parts. He selected
certain specific items, and began stowing them away in his
roomy pockets. `You know, Leela,' he said, `the very
powerful and the very stupid have one thing in common...'
   Leela wasn't listening. She stiffened suddenly, her eyes
widened, and slowly she swung her disruptor gun round to
cover the Doctor.
   `You see,' the Doctor went on, `they don't alter their
view to fit the facts. They alter the facts to fit their views...
which can be very uncomfortable if you happen to be one
of the facts that need altering.' Leela's finger tightened on
her trigger.
   Hurt by her lack of response to his rather neat turn of
phrase, the Doctor looked up, and caught sight of Leela's
reflection in one of the unused viewing screens. He ducked
and the disruptor beam sizzled over his head, shattering
the screen.
   Still moving with the same zombie-like deliberation,
Leela swung round towards him. The Doctor jumped
across the control room and took shelter behind a control
console. Leela began stalking slowly towards him--and the
Doctor started fishing hastily through his pockets.
Hurriedly he produced his sonic screwdriver, and a large,
oddly-shaped crystal.
   Just as Leela appeared over the top of the console, gun
raised, the Doctor touched the crystal with the sonic
screwdriver, and it gave out a clear, ringing note.
   Leela froze. Cautiously the Doctor went to her. She was
standing quite still, staring straight ahead. `The gun is
getting heavy,' said the Doctor softly. `It is heavy... heavy...
heavy...'
   Slowly Leela lowered the gun. `When I count to three,
you will wake. One... two... three.' On three the Doctor
tapped the crystal again, and the ringing stopped.
   Leela blinked at the Doctor, and he gave her a
reassuring smile, as he returned screwdriver and crystal to
his pocket. `I think I've got everything I need. Shall we
go?'
   Leela gave him a puzzled stare, and rubbed a hand over
her eyes.
   `Something wrong?' asked the Doctor.
   `I was by the door. Now I'm over here. I don't remember
moving.'
   `You're probably tired. Do you remember how to get to
the main control room?'
   `Yes, I think so.'
   `Then lead the way!'

As Jabel knelt in meditation before the holy relics of
Xoanon, Gentek burst in, babbling with panic. `Savages are
attacking the main airlock,' he screamed. `They will soon
gain entry to the Tower! What must we do?'
   Jabel rose and looked at Gentek with cold distaste. `And
is that your excuse for behaving like a degenerate savage
yourself?'
   Gentek drew a deep, shuddering breath as he struggled
for control. `Forgive me, Captain, but--'
   `You are an acolyte of the People of Tesh, one of the
chosen of Xoanon. Will he accept into communion an
unreasoning brute, a mindless beast?'
   Gentek gave a low ritual bow. `I accept my fault and
seek forgiveness. My mind and flesh which should be Two
were One, and the Way was hid by Blood.'
   Jabel returned the bow. `The Flesh is strong, and we are
weak. Now, make your report in a more fitting manner.'
   In a calm, emotionless voice Gentek said, `The Savages
have attacked the main lock. Soon they will gain entrance
to the Tower. What must we do?'
   In a voice equally calm, Jabel replied, `You must fall
back gradually. I will have disruptor cannon set up on level
twelve. We will trap the Savages there and destroy them.'
                      13
                 The Last Battle
Leela and the Doctor reached the corridor outside the
main control room just in time to see Jabel and Gentek
come out and hurry in the other direction.
   They pressed against the wall to avoid being seen.
Immediately the lights flickered, and red emergency
lighting came on. The Doctor pulled Leela away. `You'll
have to be quicker than that, you overgrown adding
machine,' he shouted.
   The emergency lighting faded and the main lights came
on again.

Deep inside the computer complex, multiple screens
showed images of Leela and the Doctor, and the Doctor's
voice could be heard saying, `There are probably sensory
inputs almost everywhere. He can monitor every tiny
change in temperature and pressure, every vibration...'
   `You did say he was the most powerful computer ever
built.'
   `Oh he is, and very charming too, when he wants to be.
Marvellous host. I remember one of his dinner parties...'
   The pictures on the screens changed as the Doctor and
Leela moved away.

In the corridor Leela was saying, `Doctor, what are we
going to do? Xoanon is trying to kill you--and he knows
exactly where we are.'
   `Ah yes, but we know exactly where he is. Fair dos,
Leela, you wouldn't want an unfair advantage, would you?'
   `Yes,' said Leela firmly.
   The Doctor grinned. `Somehow I thought you'd say
that.' He hurried her into the control room.
On the lower levels, a fierce battle was raging. The
Sevateem were through into the main lock by now, and
were driving the Tesh back. The Sevateem fought
ferociously, using their own primitive weapons, and
disruptor guns wrested from the Tesh they killed. Tomas
ran to Calib, who was directing operations from a side
corridor, Neeva at his side. `They're retreating, up a kind
of steel ladder,' he gasped. `Going further up into the
Tower.'
   `Then they're beaten,' said Calib exultantly. `We shall
follow them and destroy them!'
   `No, Calib. Something doesn't feel right. It was all too
easy.'
   Neeva was staring ahead, as if in a trance. `It is not yet
finished,' he whispered.
   Calib ignored them both. The success of the attack had
convinced him that he was a born general. `If we let them
get away now they'll regroup. We must attack! `
   `I tell you it's a trap, Calib!'
   `I am the leader--and I say we attack!' Calib turned to
the waiting warriors and raised his hand commandingly,
`Forward and destroy the Tesh! Attack!'
   Warriors were crowding round now and fierce voices
took up the cry. `Attack! Attack! Attack!' Calib rushed off,
at the head of the shouting warriors.
   `You fool,' yelled Tomas. `You'll get us all killed.' But
no one listened.
   Tomas ran off after the others, and after a moment
Neeva followed, his eyes wide and staring. `It is not
finished,' he whispered. He began chanting from the
sacred writings. `And the Tesh stand between the sons of
the Tribe of Sevateem and Xoanon...'

In the main control room, the Doctor opened a panel on
the central control console, to reveal a maze of electronic
circuitry. He studied it for a moment, then extracted a
transparent plastic cube. He held it up to the light, and
Leela saw that it was charred and cracked. `Just as I
thought, burnt out,' said the Doctor. He fished through the
assortment of electronic spares in his pocket and took out a
similar cube and slotted it into place. Immediately there
was a hum of power and all the lights and dials and
monitor screens in the room lit up. `That's pretty,' said
Leela delightedly. `What's it all for?'
   `These instruments watch and control all parts ofthe
ship, make sure everything's working properly.'
   Leela wandered over to a smaller, shielded console in
the far corner. `What does this one control?'
   The Doctor glanced briefly at it and said, `Atomic
generators.'
   `Why is this red light flashing, Doctor?'
   `Leela, I've not time to explain everything now,' said the
Doctor impatiently. `Later on I'll--' he broke off, realising
what Leela had said. `Flashing?' he yelled, and shot across
the control room. His hands flickered over the controls on
the little sub-console--but the red light went on flashing.
`Xoanon! He's put the atomic generators on overload.'
   `What does that mean?'
   The Doctor tipped all the electronic spares from his
pocket and began assembling them into a complicated
structure with the aid of his sonic screw-driver. `It means
I've got about, oh, twenty-four and a half minutes to build
a Reverse Memory Transfer Unit and wipe my imprint
from Xoanon's brain.'
   `And if you can't do it in time?'
   `If I can't do it,' said the Doctor grimly, `the atomic
generators will explode, taking us, Xoanon, the ship and
about half the planet with them. Effective--but
distressingly crude. I'm really rather disappointed in
Xoanon.'
   Leela stared at him, struggling to take in the meaning of
his words. Unless the Doctor succeeded, they were very
close to total annihilation.
Under Gentek's command a small group of Tesh were
setting up the disruptor cannons--larger tripod-mounted
versions of the hand weapons. `Check that the sights are
correctly aligned,' commanded Gentek. `There must be no
mistake.'
    Jabel surveyed the preparations. `Are the projectors set
up so that the Savages will be forced to come this way?'
    `Yes, Captain.'
    `Excellent. Then all that remains is to project a blank
wall in front of the disruptor cannon. When the Savages
enter the corridor we'll wipe them out before they know
where the beams are coming from...'
    Jabel staggered, putting his hand to his forehead.
Something, some other consciousness was invading his
mind. He felt a vast, immensely powerful intelligence
surging through his brain, taking control...
    Gentek stared at him in concern. `Is something wrong,
Captain?'
    `Don't you feel it... something... something...' Suddenly
Gentek too put a hand to his forehead. `Yes, Captain... is
it...'
    `Communion,' gasped Jabel. `Communion with Xoanon
at last!'

The Doctor had constructed a kind of headset, and was
connecting it to a complicated structure of electronic parts.
From this central structure ran a long lead with a
connecting-socket on the end.
   Unable to help, and scarcely daring to speak, Leela
looked on worriedly. She saw that the light on the smaller
console was flashing more brightly now. It had been joined
by others, and by a steadily rising electronic bleep as all
over the console dials and gauges moved towards danger-
point.
   On the doors of the computer complex a face had
appeared. It was the Doctor's face twisted and distorted,
and it pulsed steadily with an eerie light.
Suddenly Leela touched her hand to her forehead. The
Doctor went on with his task, explaining as he worked.
`Nearly done, Leela. It should be possible to re-absorb
everything I originally put into the data core. In theory
that should leave me unharmed, and Xoanon sane. Unless
of course he's too far gone already, or so powerful that he
swamps my brain and burns it out...'
   The glowing face on the door began to speak. The words
were slurred and guttural at first then the voice became
strong and clear. `Destroy and be free!' It chanted. `Destroy
and be free! Destroy and be free! Destroy and be free!'

Leela took her hand from her head, and her lips began to
move. `Destroy and be free,' she whispered. `Destroy and
be free! Destroy and be free! Destroy and be free!'
   Drawing her knife she advanced on the Doctor.
                          14
                       Recovery
At the head of their warriors, Calib, Tomas and Neeva
advanced cautiously along the corridors of level twelve.
They turned a corner and found themselves facing the
muzzles of disruptor cannons--cannons with no one
behind them.
    Tomas held up his hand to check the warriors. `You see?
It's a trap, set by the Tesh.'
    `Then where are they?' asked Calib logically. `They're
retreating I tell you. Why else would they abandon the
weapons?'
    Still worried and suspicious, Tomas shook his head. `It
doesn't make sense... What's happening?'
    `There's only one way to find out,' said Calib. He was
about to lead the warriors forward when suddenly he
stiffened, putting his hand to his head. His lips began to
move. `Destroy and be free,' he whispered. `Destroy and be
free! Destroy and be free! Destroy and be free!'
    Tomas and the other warriors took up the chant.
`Destroy and be free. Destroy and be free. Destroy and be
free!' Faces blank, eyes staring, they moved slowly away,
zombies controlled by Xoanon's will.
    Only Neeva did not move. He stood still, his head on
one side, as if he was listening. His face was not blank, it
was alive with a kind of mad intelligence. `I hear you,
Xoanon,' whispered Neeva softly. `I hear you--and I am
coming.' He went over to one of the disruptor cannon and
lifted the heavy weapon from its stand.
    Carrying it with great difficulty he staggered off down
the corridor--in the opposite direction to the others...

The face was bigger now. It glowed more brightly, and the
chant was louder. `Destroy and be free! Destroy and be
free! Destroy and be free!'

The Doctor finished his task and looked up--just in time
to see Leela's knife thrusting towards his back.
   He flung himself to one side and the blade flashed past
him, stabbing deep into the console, and cutting across a
power cable. There was a shower of sparks and the shock
threw Leela across the room. She hit the far wall and slid
to the ground. The Doctor took a quick look at her. `You'll
be all right,' he muttered. The bleeps from the atomic
generator console were louder now, their note higher and
more urgent. The Doctor hurried back to his rigged-up
Memory Transfer Unit and put on the head-set. Crossing
to the computer terminal that would give him access to the
brain of Xoanon. he was about to plug-in the connector
when strong hands grabbed his wrists. He was pulled away
from the terminal, his arms pinioned behind him.
Struggling wildly the Doctor saw that his assailants were a
mixture of Sevateem and Tesh. Jabel, Gentek, Calib and
Tomas, all mindless servants of Xoanon's will.
   The warning bleeps from the generator console rose
higher and higher.
   The Doctor knew it was no use attempting to talk to his
captors.
   Instead he called out to the intelligence that con-trolled
them. `Xoanon, you'll destroy yourself as well as me!'

The huge twisted face glowed brightly and his voice was a
demented howl. `Destroy, free, destroy, free destroy free...'
it gibbered.
    Neeva staggered around the corner, struggling under the
weight of the disruptor cannon. At the sight of the glowing
face, his face lit up with hatred. Swinging up the heavy
weapon he screamed, `Die Xoanon!' --and fired.
    For a second nothing happened. Then a beam of power
burst from the glowing face. Neeva's body glowed, twisted
in mid-air and vanished, utterly consumed by the
shattering burst of energy.

At the instant of Neeva's death, Xoanon's control over his
servants slackened--just for a second. This second was
enough for the Doctor to wrench himself free, and hurl
himself at the computer terminal. `Now, Xoanon!' he
shouted exultantly--and seizing the connector, he lunged
for the socket.

The great glowing face screamed, `No! No... No...'

Jabel, Calib and the others, under Xoanon's control once
more, leaped for the Doctor, but they were too late...
   The Doctor thrust the connector into its socket... his
body arched, and he gave a cry of pain...
   The glowing face on the door screamed too, echoing the
Doctor's agony. It shrank to a tiny spot of light and
disappeared.

The Doctor fell back unconscious, ripping away the
headset in the fall.
   Leela moaned and stirred, beginning to come round.
   Calib and Tomas, Jabel and Gentek suddenly recovered
from their waking trance. Sevateem and Tesh stared at
each other in mutual confusion, over the body of the
Doctor.

After an age in which he had floated down and down into
limitless darkness, the Doctor drifted back to the surface
and awoke.
   He was lying where he had fallen in the control room,
though someone had straightened him out, put a pillow
under his head, and covered him with a thin silver foil
space blanket.
   Leela sat cross-legged on the floor beside him munching
cubes of food concentrated from a foil container. `Hello,'
said the Doctor weakly.
   `Hullo, I was beginning to think you'd never come
round.'
   The Doctor struggled to a sitting position, and winced
as the movement sent a stab of pain through his head. `I'm
beginning to wish I hadn't.'
   `We thought it was probably safer not to move you.'
   `How long have I been unconscious?'
   `Two days.'
   `Two days? Two days? I haven't got time to be lying
around here for two days!'
   `What happened about Xoanon, Doctor?'
   `I explained what I was doing. Weren't you listening?'
   `I don't know. I don't remember anything.'
   `No, I don't suppose you do,' said the Doctor
thoughtfully. `Well, I removed--I hope I removed--half of
Xoanon's dual personality. How is he?'
   Leela shrugged. `Silent. There hasn't been a murmur
from him since we found you unconscious. Jabel's people
don't dare approach the Sacred Chamber.'
   `The what?' said the Doctor sternly.
   `That's what they call it.'
   `And what do you call it?'
   Leela frowned in thought. `The main computer
complex?'
   `Better. Go on.'
   `I've told them as much as I can but they won't listen to
me. Jabel says I'm an ignorant Savage. We have what you
might call a guarded truce at the moment.' Leela brought
him a beaker of water, and he swallowed thirstily. He gave
her back the beaker and started to get to his feet. `Give me
one of those cubes will you?' He took it and started
chewing. `As soon as I get my strength back, we'll go and
see Xoanon.'
   Leela hesitated. `Can I... come inside with you, this
time?' Despite the Doctor's influence she found that the
thought of seeing Xoanon filled her with a mixture of
curiosity and dread.
   `Perhaps, Leela, perhaps.' The Doctor reached for
another food-cube.

In an amazingly short time the Doctor's extraordinary
constitution, together with the effect of the food cubes,
restored him to his old self. Still munching the last of the
food cubes, he led Leela along the corridor to the computer
complex.
   Outside the doors a disruptor cannon lay abandoned.
The Doctor looked at the weapon, and at the blistering on
the doors. `Maybe that's why Xoanon lost his grip on
Tomas and the others. Someone distracted him. I wonder
who it was...'
   `They say Neeva went mad. He was threatening to kill
Xoanon. And now he's missing. They've searched the ship
and he can't be found anywhere.'
   `It could have been him... If he really was mad, it would
have made it difficult for Xoanon to control him.' They
came up to the doors and the Doctor paused, smiling
encouragingly at Leela. `Perhaps Xoanon himself will tell
us.'
   He touched the control and the door opened. `Anybody
home?'
   There was a moment of silence, then a calm voice said,
`Ah, Doctor! I have been waiting for you both. Come in
please.' The Doctor led the way into the computer
complex.
   It was a very different place from the one he had seen on
his last visit. The central chamber was bathed in a warm
clear glow, and all around complex banks of machinery
hummed and whirred contentedly.
   The Doctor spoke to the empty air. `How do you feel?'
   `I am--whole,' said the voice. As it spoke the lights
pulsed gently in time with the words. The Doctor smiled.
The voice was one he had never heard before, calm,
resonant, mature. Above all, he noted happily, it was not in
the least like his own voice. Xoanon's split personality
seemed to have been cured.
    `And how are you, Doctor?' asked the voice politely.
    `Oh, mustn't complain,' said the Doctor hastily. `I'm
fine now, thanks.'
    `Good, good,' said Xoanon. `I'm glad.'
    There was a rather embarrassed pause, like one of those
moments at parties when no one can think of anything to
say.
    It was Leela who broke the silence. She had questions to
ask Xoanon, and she couldn't hold them back any longer.
`Why did you do it?'
    `Could you be more specific?'
    `Keep us ignorant and afraid. Make us hate one
another.'
    Xoanon paused, considering his words, then said sadly,
`I created a world in my own image. I made your people act
out my torment. I made my madness your reality.'
    `And told yourself you were creating a race of super-
humans?' suggested the Doctor.
    `That is so. Independence, strength, and courage in the
Sevateem. Self-denial, mind-control, telepathy in the
Tesh.'
    `And hostility and conflict to speed up development,'
concluded the Doctor. `Until you were ready to combine
the best qualities of both Tribes.'
    Leela thought back over the long struggle for existence
that had been the Tribes' fate for her own life and for
generations before that. The wars, the hunger, the deaths...
`That's horrible.'
    `Yes, it is,' agreed the Doctor. Gently he raised his voice,
addressing Xoanon. `Isn't it horrible, Xoanon?'
    `Yes,' said the voice sadly, `it was horrible. But now it is
over. We are all free, thanks to you, Doctor.'
    The Doctor coughed and said modestly, `Well, it was
the least I could do, in the circumstances. After all, I did
start the trouble in the first place.'
    `Yours was a mistake anyone could have made.'
    `I don't think anyone could have made it,' said the
Doctor huffily, and Leela laughed.
   Xoanon laughed too, and suddenly the Doctor joined in,
greatly relieved. Now he knew Xoanon was cured. A sense
of humour is the finest proof of sanity.
   `Please, sit down,' said Xoanon. Two chairs appeared
from nowhere.
   Leela jumped back in astonishment, but the Doctor
seemed to take Xoanon's powers of teleportation as a
matter of course. `This is nice,' he said cosily, as he settled
down.
   `Tell me, Doctor,' said Xoanon. `Where do you think I
first started to go wrong?'

After a very long, and to Leela largely incomprehensible
conversation with Xoanon, the Doctor finally led the way
out of the computer complex and back to the main control
room. There they found Jabel, Gentek, Calib and Tomas,
who were busily discussing Calib's plan to unite the two
tribes.
   A furious row was in progress. Jabel's Tesh conditioning
was still too powerful for him to show much emotion but
he spoke with icily controlled anger. `The Tesh, my people,
would never agree to such a degenerate plan.'
   `That plan is necessary, Jabel,' urged Tomas. `The
Tribes must join for mutual survival.'
   `I do not agree.'
   `We will ask the Doctor's opinion when he returns,' said
Tomas.
   `Is it wise?' argued Jabel. `Would Xoanon wish it?'
   `An important consideration, Captain,' said Gentek,
loyally supporting his leader.
   Calib turned away in disgust. `This discussion is a waste
of time.'
   Jabel smiled icily at Gentek. `What can one expect when
dealing with Savages?'
   Calib glanced at him. `Watch your tongue, you scrawny
mindbender, or I'll break you in two.'
   The Doctor cleared his throat loudly and they all
turned. `Ah, gentlemen,' he said cheerfully. `Democracy in
action, I see! `
   They all crowded round him. `What did Xoanon say,
Doctor?' asked Tomas eagerly.
   `He is anxious to put right the wrong he has done. He
has great knowledge and power which he will put at your
disposal.'
   `Can we trust him?' asked Calib, cynical as ever.
   The Doctor held out his hand. In it was a clear plastic
box with a red button set in the lid. `He offers you this, as a
sign of good faith. Press this button, and Xoanon's data
banks will be erased. He will cease to exist.'
   `Another of his promises?'
   The Doctor held out the box. `There's one way to find
out.' Calib backed away nervously. The Doctor offered the
box around the group. `Anyone? No? Good! You have to
trust someone sometime.' The box vanished from his hand.
   Sevateem and Tesh looked uneasily at each other for a
moment. Then Gentek said tentatively, `If the Tribes do
merge we must choose a leader...'
   The Doctor began moving towards the door. `That's not
my problem, gentlemen.'
   `There's no choice to be made,' shouted Calib. `I am the
leader of the Sevateem and we are the stronger.'
   `Perhaps so,' said Jabel coldly. `But my people of Tesh
would never accept the leadership of a mindless Savage.'
   Calib's hand went to his knife. `That is the final insult!'
   Hurriedly Leela thrust herself between them. `I'm a
mindless Savage, Jabel, according to you. Yet I have talked
with Xoanon.'
   Tomas saw a chance of compromise. `And that makes
you the ideal candidate, Leela. You should be our leader.'
   `Me?' Leela was astonished. `But I don't want to be
leader. I'm far too unreasonable, aren't I, Doctor?' She
turned round. `Doctor?'
   But the Doctor had gone.
                          15
                       Departure
The Doctor had just opened the TARDIS door when he
heard someone running towards him through the trees.
`Doctor!' called a familiar voice.
   The Doctor turned. `Leela!'
   Leela hurried up to the TARDIS, glancing quickly at
the open door. `I thought you might need an escort. The
creatures are still out here.'
   `You needn't worry about them any more, Leela. The
phantoms were merely projections from Xoanon's
disturbed subconscious. Now he's himself again, they no
longer exist.'
   Leela listened. The forest was calm and silent. `I
suppose you're always right about everything?'
   `Invariably, invariably,' said the Doctor modestly. `Well,
goodbye, Leela.'
   `Doctor--take me with you.'
   `Why?'
   `Well, you like me, don't you?'
   `Yes, I suppose I do like you,' said the Doctor gently. `I
like lots of people, but I don't cart them about the Universe
with me. Goodbye, Leela.'
   Before he could stop her, Leela darted past him,
through the open door and into the TARDIS.
   `Come out of there,' shouted the Doctor. `Out I say!
Come out!' He followed her inside.
   Leela blinked a little at the sight of the impossibly large
control room. but after her brief acquaintance with the
Doctor she was used to miracles.
   As the Doctor came through the door in pursuit, Leela
ducked round the other side of the central control console.
`Out you come,' said the Doctor sternly. `And don't touch
anything.'
   Leela saw a large important-looking lever near her
hand. She reached out for it...
   `Don't touch that,' yelled the Doctor. `It'll send us off
into the space-time continuum...'
   Leela grabbed the lever and pulled it over hard. The
TARDIS doors closed, the central column began moving
up and down...

... and a wheezing, groaning noise shattered the calm of the
forest as the square blue shape of the TARDIS faded away.
    The Doctor was off on a new adventure--with a new
companion!
