`It's happening, Brigadier ! It's
happening !' Sarah cried out. The
Brigadier watched, fascinated, as the
lifeless body of his old friend and
companion, Dr Who, suddenly began to
glow with an eerie golden light . . . The
features were blurring, changing . . .
`Well, bless my soul,' said the Brigadier.
`WHO will he be next ?'

Read the last exciting adventure of
DR WHO's 3rd Incarnation !




U.K. ................................................... 35p
NEW ZEALAND ..........$1.10
CANADA ..............................$1.35
MALTA .........................................40c             ISBN 0 426 10655 5
         DOCTOR WHO
           AND THE
        PLANET OF THE
           SPIDERS
Based on the BBC television serial by Robert Sloman by
arrangement with the British Broadcasting Corporation


            TERRANCE DICKS




                A TARGET BOOK
                    published by
              The Paperback Division of
               W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd
A Target Book
Published in 1975
by the Paperback Division of W. H. Allen & Co. Ltd.
A Howard & Wyndham Company
44 Hill Street, London W1X 8LB

Novelisation copyright © Terrance Dicks 1975
Original script copyright © Robert Sloman 1974
`Doctor Who' series copyright © British Broadcasting
Corporation 1974, 1975

Reproduced, printed and bound in Great Britain by
The Anchor Press Ltd, Tiptree, Essex


ISBN 0 426 10655 5

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not,
by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out or
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it
is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
                CONTENTS
Prologue: The Mystery of the Crystal
1 The Menace at the Monastery
2 The Deadly Experiment
3 The Coming of the Spider
4 The Chase for the Crystal
5 The Council of the Spiders
6 Arrival on Metebelis Three
7 Prisoner of the Spiders
8 The Doctor Hits Back
9 In the Lair of the Great One
10 Return to Earth
11 The Battle with the Spiders
12 The Last Enemy
Epilogue: An End and a Beginning
                Prologue
         The Mystery of the Crystal
Night falls suddenly in the rain forests of the upper
Amazon. One moment, the little clearing was bathed in
greenish gloom by the light filtering through the dense
carpet of the tree-tops overhead; the next it was plunged
into darkness.
   The Indian porters were busily setting up the little
encampment. Soon the tents were up, and a campfire
blazing. The explorer came out of his tent, and watched the
Indians going about their work, unpacking supplies and
preparing the evening meal. Everything seemed normal:
they had carried out this routine a hundred times before.
But somehow the atmosphere was thick with fear and
menace. Suddenly the men stopped work, huddled
together, and began to whisper amongst themselves. The
explorer thought of the heavy revolver packed somewhere
at the bottom of his luggage. Then he shook his head. He
wasn't going to turn against everything he'd always
believed. His business was saving lives, not destroying
them,
   His wife came from inside the tent and joined him. She
seemed tiny, almost child-like, beside his lanky form. He
put out an arm and drew her to his side. She nodded
towards the little group of Indians. `They're still on the
warpath, then?'
   He nodded his head. `You're telling me, love. You could
cut the atmosphere with a machete.'
   They stood for a moment, listening to the low voices of
the Indians. Then the old man who was their recognised
leader detached himself from the others and came towards
the tent.
   The explorer's wife looked on as the old Indian stood
before them. He was speaking in a guttural, urgent voice.
She had never mastered the Indian speech, but she could
easily guess what he was saying. She heard her husband
reply. Languages came easily to him, and he was fluent in
all the Indian dialects. Perhaps it was something to do with
being Welsh, she thought. After that, other languages must
seem simple.
    She listened intently to the voices of the two men. It was
funny how much you could understand, even without
knowing a word of the language. She heard the old
Indian's voice, stern and insistent; then her husband's
protesting, persuading. A further burst of staccato syllables
from the Indian ­ a sweeping gesture at the blackness of
the surrounding jungle that could only be a threat. Her
husband again, resigned, placatory, reassuring.
    The Indian peered keenly at him, black eyes impassive
under the fringe of black hair. He gave a final satisfied
grunt, and strode across the clearing. She could hear him
talking to the others in a low voice. After a moment the
porters started working again. She felt her husband's hand
on her elbow, and he led her back inside the tent.
    `Listen, love,' he began.
    She interrupted him. `Don't tell me ­ it's the crystal
again, isn't it?'
    He nodded. `'Fraid so ­ after that last accident at the
river crossing, they're convinced it's bad luck. They've
given us an ultimatum. It goes or they go.'
    `But that was just an ordinary little accident.'
    `We've had too many little accidents. They mean what
they say.'
    `Surely they wouldn't just leave us here?'
    `It could be worse than that. They know they shouldn't
abandon us ­ they'd be in trouble with the Government if
we complained. So they'd probably decide it was safer to
cover their tracks.'
    `How?'
    He took a deep breath. `These people used to be head
hunters not too long ago. They might prefer to make sure
we weren't in a position to complain about them ­ kill us
and disappear into the jungle.'
    She sank down on the rickety camp bed. `What did you
say to them?'
    `Well, first of all, they wanted me to throw the thing
away.'
    `No... I won't do it!' Her voice was fierce.
    He raised his hand placatingly. `Hang on ­ I managed to
convince him that the safest thing would be to send it
away. Back to where it came from, right out of their land.
We'll reach one of the river trading posts day after
tomorrow. You can pack it up and send it off in the mail
boat. Honestly ­ it's the only way.'
    She nodded, accepting the situation. `O.K. I'll make up
the parcel now.'
    He gave her a pat on the shoulder and left the tent to
supervise the porters, relieved that his wife had taken it so
well. He knew how attached she was to this souvenir of her
old friends and her former life.
    The girl sitting on the bed sighed, and reached for the
little rucksack in which she carried her personal
possessions. From the bottom of it she fished a small
bundle. She unwrapped it and revealed the cause of all the
trouble: a many-faceted blue stone ­ a sort of crystal. At
first, it seemed dull and opaque. Then, as you looked at it,
something-strange happened. Little blue fires seemed to
spring up deep inside it, and the crystal began to glow...
    She closed her eyes for a moment, and then re-wrapped
the stone. She'd better send a letter with the parcel. She
fished in the rucksack again, and produced a leather
writing case and a ball-point pen.
    Josephine Jones, formerly Jo Grant, one-time member of
UNIT, one-time assistant to that mysterious individual
known only as the Doctor, propped the case on her knee,
and began to write....

Many thousands of miles away, another ex-member of
UNIT crouched motionless in a darkened cellar. From his
hiding place at the top of the steps, he was watching a little
group of robed figures, sitting cross-legged in a circle
around an intricately drawn symbol. Candles stuck into old
wine bottles illuminated the weird scene with a flickering
yellow light.
   The men in the circle were chanting in low guttural
voices, accompanying themselves with the regular clash of
cymbals. They swayed to and fro as if hypnotised.
   The watching man shivered in the darkness. An
atmosphere of brooding evil filled the cellar, and it was
growing stronger. In the centre of the chanting circle a
shape was beginning to form... Near the watcher's face, a
spider's web suddenly vibrated with life as the spider ran
quickly to its centre. The watcher leaned forward for a
better view and the silky, sticky strands of the web brushed
his face. He shuddered away from their touch and jumped
back, knocking over a wine bottle at his feet. just as the
chanting was rising to a peak, the bottle rolled down the
steps, and smashed on the floor with an appalling crash.
   The chanting stopped dead. The robed figures sprang to
their feet. Some of them ran to the head of the stairs ­ but
the watcher was gone.
   Outside, in the gardens of the big old country house,
Mike Yates, formerly Captain Yates, one-time member of
UNIT, one-time assistant to Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart,
ran through the darkness towards his car. He was more
frightened than he had ever been in his life.
   The little group in the cellar had been thrown into a
panic. They gathered round their leader, a middle-aged
man with haggard, bitter features. His name was Lupton.
   He was talking angrily to a younger, weak-faced man
called Barnes, who had been sitting nearest the door.
`You're sure you didn't see anything?'
   Barnes shook his head. `It was the wind, it must have
been. Blew open the cellar door, knocked the bottle over...'
His voice tailed off, unconvincing even to himself.
   `Listen,' said Lupton suddenly. `What's that?' They
heard the harsh roar of an engine going away into the
distance. `A sports car,' said Lupton menacingly. `There's
only one sports car here ­ it belongs to our new friend, Mr.
Yates.'
                   1
       The Menace at the Monastery
Brigadier Alastair Lethbridge-Stewart, head of the British
section of UNIT, the United Nations Intelligence
Taskforce, huddled deeper in his seat and hoped no one
would recognise him. Not that he was engaged in some
secret espionage mission; he was very much off-duty. On
the other hand, you couldn't exactly say he was enjoying
himself either. Why on earth he'd let the Doctor drag him
to this tatty little music hall... The Brigadier shot a
sideways glance at his companion. Elegant as always, in
ruffled shirt with velvet smoking jacket, the Doctor was
leaning forward with evident enjoyment.
   On stage, a little man in a baggy check suit and a red
nose was clutching a hand mike, leaning forward and
talking very fast, as if afraid that the audience would make
off before he could deliver his jokes. No one could blame
them if they did, thought the Brigadier bitterly.
   `'Ere's a good one, 'eard this, 'eard this?' said the little
man rapidly. `Archimedes, you've 'eard of Archimedes,
'course you 'ave, well, when he jumped out of the bath and
ran down the street with nothing on, he didn't shout
"Eureka!" he shouted, "I'm a streaker!"' The Brigadier
groaned inwardly and threw the chuckling Doctor a glance
of bitter reproach.
   Things didn't improve much in the next hour. Act
followed act, all of them pretty dreadful. The Brigadier
perked up a little at the appearance of `Fatima, exotic
dancer of the Orient'. She wasn't very oriental, but she was
certainly exotic, young, pretty and extremely agile.
   The Doctor glanced at the Brigadier to see if this was
any more to his taste. The Brigadier was leaning forward,
chin in hand, an expression of intense concentration on his
face. When the dance ended, and Fatima and her
remaining veils undulated from the stage, the Doctor said,
`You seemed to enjoy that all right.'
   `Very fit, that girl,' said the Brigadier solemnly.
`Extraordinary muscular control. Must adapt some of those
movements as exercises for the men.'
   The Doctor looked at him open-mouthed. `They'd take
some adapting! Surely you can't be...'
   The Brigadier's mouth twitched under his moustache,
and the Doctor realised that he was making one of his rare
jokes. For once the Brigadier was pulling his leg. The
Doctor grinned appreciatively, and pointed a long finger at
the programme on his lap. `This is what we really came for.'
   The Brigadier peered at the programme. `Professor
Hubert Clegg,' he read. `Mind Reader Extraordinary.'
   Driving back to UNIT H.Q. half an hour later, the
Brigadier still didn't feel much the wiser. The Doctor had
watched Professor Clegg's act in enraptured silence, and he
jumped up from his seat as soon as it was over ­ even
though this was only the end of the first half of the show.
He had stopped at the box office to leave a note for
Professor Clegg before they left.
   The Brigadier looked at the Doctor, who was slumped
in the passenger seat deep in thought.
   `I suppose you're feeling pretty disappointed, Doctor?'
   `Why should I be?'
   `Your Professor Clegg ­ didn't that performance
convince you he's a fake?'
   `On the contrary ­ it convinced me that he's a very
powerful clairvoyant.'
   `But that act of his was sheer trickery, Doctor,' protested
the Brigadier. `Simple word-code with his assistant.
Spotted it straight away!'
   The Doctor smiled. `Oh, I know that. Now why should a
man with the powers he has use cheap tricks?'
   The Brigadier was exasperated. `How do you know he's
got any powers?'
   `Vibrations,' said the Doctor mysteriously. `Couldn't
you feel them?'
   `Frankly, no.'
   The Doctor rubbed his chin thoughtfully. `I've asked
Professor Clegg to visit UNIT tomorrow morning. Perhaps
I can persuade him to give you a little demonstration of his
real powers...'
   Even the Doctor didn't realise that his interest in
Professor Clegg was to be the prelude to the most
dangerous adventure of his life.

Sarah Jane Smith flicked through her magazine for the
tenth time, realised she wasn't taking in a single word, and
threw it on the seat. She looked out of the window. The
little local diesel was chugging steadily along through a
very pretty rural landscape, the rolling fields stretching
away on all sides. `Very picturesque,' she thought, `but I
really shouldn't be here at all. I'm supposed to be in
London, researching a story on grass-roots resistance to
property speculators for that magazine.' Although Sarah
was technically a free-lance, the magazine was by far her
most regular source of work, and it wouldn't do to offend
them. If Mike Yates hadn't sounded so desperate over the
telephone...
    It wasn't even as if she knew him all that well. They'd
met during the time when London was being terrorised by
prehistoric monsters brought back from the past. Yates, at
this time still the Brigadier's trusted No. 2, had been tense
and withdrawn. Naturally enough since, as they'd later
discovered, he'd been won over to the other side and was
secretly working against them. When the whole affair was
finally over, Captain Yates had been diplomaticaIly
invalided out of UNIT. The official story was that he'd had
some kind of nervous breakdown. No one had seen or
heard of him for ages. Now here he was, popping up with
some crazy story about murky goings-on in a Tibetan
monastery deep in the English countryside. `Perhaps he
really has had a nervous breakdown.' she thought to
herself, as the train jolted slowly on its way.
   At that very moment, Sarah's visit was the subject of a
heated argument between the man called Lupton, and a
Tibetan monk whose name was Cho-Je. `A woman
journalist!' Lupton was saying angrily. `We don't want her
here.'
   Cho-Je's ivory-coloured face broke into a thousand tiny,
smiling wrinkles. `We cannot shut out the world entirely,
my brother,' he said in his clipped yet sing-song voice.
   `That's why I came here to get away from the world,' said
Lupton angrily. `So did the others.'
   Again Cho-Je smiled. `One day you will learn to walk in
solitude amidst all the bustle of the world.'
   `It's not too late to stop her coming.'
   `Oh but it is,' said Cho-Je placidly. `Mr. Yates has
already gone to meet her at the station.'
   Lupton frowned. `Yates? Did he suggest this visit?'
Cho-Je nodded. `He knows the young lady, I believe. He
brought her request to me.'
   A few minutes later, Lupton was talking to Barnes in
the corridor. `How can it be coincidence?' he was saying
angrily. `He's bringing her here because he suspects
something.'
   Barnes looked frightened. `We'll have to stop for a
while.'
   `Stop ­ now? Just when we're on the point of breaking
through? You felt the power in that circle last night ­ `
   Lupton broke off as Tommy, the monastery handyman,
shambled along the corridor. Tommy was a hulking, slow-
witted youth, usually described as simple by his fellow
villagers. He had worked at the monastery ever since it
opened. Tommy was fiercely devoted to Cho-Je and his
fellow monks ­ perhaps because they treated him with
exactly the same quiet courtesy that they extended to
everyone else.
   Tommy beamed at the two men and held out a massive
hand. In his palm lay a rather crumpled daisy. `Look,
pretty,' he said.
   `Go and get on with your work,' said Lupton
impatiently.
   Tommy was indignant. `Finished weeding. Look,
Lupton, pretty flower.'
   Lupton's temper snapped and he gave Tommy a savage
shove. Tommy, taken by surprise, stumbled backwards and
fell over his own feet. Lupton gripped Barnes by the arm
and dragged him away. `We must get the others together.
There isn't much time.'
   The two men disappeared down the corridor. Tommy
picked himself up, groping for his precious flower, which
had been squashed flat in his fall. `Poor pretty,' he said. His
face crumpled, and he began to cry.

As Mike Yates's little sports car bounced along the narrow
country lane, Sarah raised her voice above the snarl of the
engine. `Let me see if I've got this straight, Mike. After
you, er, left UNIT, you heard about this meditation centre,
opened by these two Tibetans. You thought it might help
you to get yourself sorted out, so you came down here. Now
you're convinced that a group of your fellow students are
up to something ­ but you're not sure what?'
   Yates nodded. `All sounds pretty thin, doesn't it? Maybe
I shouldn't have bothered you.'
   `Those men in the cellar,' said Sarah thoughtfully.
`Couldn't they just be doing some kind of special
meditation?'
   `Then why keep it so secret? Besides, the atmosphere in
that cellar ­ it was thick with evil. You could feel it. I'm
sure UNIT ought to know about it.'
   Sarah shrugged. `So tell the Brigadier!'
   `You think he'd believe me ­ with my record?'

(In the cellar of the monastery, the circle of chanting
figures was once more assembled. Their voices rose and fell
in a guttural chant. Lupton's face was a mask of
concentration. He narrowed his eyes. He could see the little
car speeding along the narrow lane. `Now,' he muttered
hoarsely. `Now...')

Sarah frowned and shook her head. A sudden sense of
oppression, of dread, was coming over her. She felt a
sudden irrational impulse to beg Mike to turn back. She
told herself not to be silly and said, `So you want me to
take a look around, and then report to the Brig for you?'
   Yates nodded. She could read the appeal in his eyes.
Sarah said dubiously, `Well, all right, Mike. But I'll need
quite a bit of convincing before I go to the Brig with some
daft story about mad monks...'

(In the cellar the chanting rose to a peak. `Now!' said
Lupton fiercely. `Now!')

The sports car was tearing down a country lane. Although
still narrow, the lane ran in a straight line for a mile ahead
of them. It was now completely empty, and Mike had
instinctively put his foot down.
    The tractor just couldn't have been there. The lane was
empty; there were no turnings or gates. Yet suddenly it was
there, its huge red bulk blocking the entire lane as, they
rushed towards it.
    Mike wrenched the wheel round and shot the sports car
through a gap in the hedge. They burst through into a
field, the car skidded round in a huge arc, back through a
second gap, and on to the road again. With a shrieking of
brakes, it skidded to a halt.
    Mike Yates sat very still, gripping the wheel so hard that
it hurt his hands. He drew a deep breath and turned to
Sarah. She was looking over her shoulder, back at the
tractor ­ but there was no tractor. It had vanished, as
impossibly as it had appeared. The lane was empty.
    Sarah said shakily, `You saw it too, Mike?'
    `The tractor? Yes, of course.'
    Sarah's face was grim. `All right, Mike. I'm convinced.
Let's visit this monastery of yours.'
                      2
            The Deadly Experiment
Off-stage, Professor Clegg looked shabby, and rather
insignificant. The `artistic' bow-tie was faded, the black
velvet smoking jacket long past its former elegance. But
the Professor held himself upright, and did his best to put
a good face on things. He swept off his battered hat with a
flourish, and said jauntily, `Gentlemen! A very great
pleasure to meet you.'
    The Brigadier nodded a little stiffly, but the Doctor
replied with equally formal courtesy `Professor Clegg! It
was extremely kind of you to come.'
    Once the social preliminaries were over, the Professor
felt rather at a loss. `As a matter of fact, I'm not sure why I
have come. Your message was a little ambiguous.' He
looked at the Brigadier's uniformed figure, and hazarded a
guess. `You want me to do my act for you? A regimental
guest night, perhaps? I do quite a deal of cabaret work.'
    `Good lord, no!' said the Brigadier hastily. Then,
realising he'd been a little too hasty for politeness, he
added, `Clever stuff mind you, but not really my cup of tea.'
    The Doctor cut in hurriedly, `As a matter of fact,
Professor, I asked you to come here because I'm doing a
little research into E.S.P.'
    `That's extra sensory perception, you know,' said the
Brigadier helpfully.
    Clegg smiled. `Oh yes. As a matter of fact, I do know.'
    The Brigadier looked a little deflated. `Well, I didn't.
Not till the Doctor explained.'
    The Doctor gave Clegg a reassuring smile. `You see, I'm
trying to cover the whole field ­ psychometry,
clairvoyance, telepathy, and so on. I very much hope you
can help me, Professor.'
    Clegg began to look frightened. He edged nervously
towards the door. `I'm sorry, I'm afraid I can't. You see, to
begin with, I'm not a professor at all. That's just for stage
purposes. And as for my act...'
    `All a lot of tricks, eh?' said the Brigadier knowingly.
`Word-code with your assistant, that sort of thing?'
    Clegg nodded dumbly. The Brigadier shot the Doctor
an `I told you so' look. The Doctor said gently, `Don't
worry, Professor Clegg, your secret in safe with me ­ your
real secret, that is.' He paused for a moment, and said
deliberately, `I shall tell no one that you really do have
super-normal powers.'
    Clegg seemed to deflate, like a punctured balloon. He
reeled as if about to faint, and sank down gratefully into a
chair pushed forward by the Brigadier.
    `It's true, isn't it?' said the Doctor.
    Clegg nodded. `It's happening more and more,' he
whispered. `I don't want it. I was quite happy just as a
performer. Now I seem to be developing this power. I hate
it. The things I can do! They frighten me.'
    `Do?' said the Doctor keenly. `Do you mean
teleportation?'
    `Well, no. But psychokinesis, yes.'
    Despite his newly-acquired knowledge of the
paranormal, the Brigadier was now out of his depth. He
shot the Doctor an enquiring glance. `Psycho what?'
    `Psychokinesis,' said the Doctor impatiently. `Moving
objects by the power of the mind. Professor--Mr.--Clegg,
do you think we might have a demonstration?'
    Clegg       looked        dubious.    `Well...' he   said
unenthusiastically.
    The Doctor gave him a most charming smile. `Please
try. It would be of the greatest assistance to me.'
    Clegg braced himself, then nodded. `Very well.' He
glanced round the laboratory. The Doctor and the
Brigadier had been having coffee just before his arrival,
and the tray with the coffee things still stood on one of the
laboratory benches. Clegg stared at it fixedly and with a
frown of concentration. The Doctor and the Brigadier
followed the direction of his gaze. Suddenly, the tray rose a
few feet into the air. It hovered uncertainly for a moment
and floated into the middle of the room. Then Clegg
gasped, `I can't... I can't...' He rubbed his hand across his
eyes and the tray crashed to the ground.
   The Brigadier jumped. `Jolly impressive,' he said a little
nervously. `You ought to use that in your act.'
   Clegg rounded on him fiercely. `And lose my sanity? It
would be a poor exchange.' The little man was white and
sweating, his face drained with effort.
   The Doctor put a reassuring hand on his shoulder. `Mr.
Clegg, your powers are perfectly normal. They lie dormant
in everyone.'
   Clegg sighed. `If only I could believe that. I feel such a ­
a freak.'
   `Help me in my experiments,' said the Doctor urgently.
`We can learn more about your powers, help you to control
them. We can find others like you, so that you won't be so
alone... `
   Clegg looked up at him, new hope in his eyes. `If you
can do that, Doctor,' he said eagerly, `you'll make my life
worth living again. Of course I'll help you as much as I
can.'
   `Splendid!' said the Doctor. `We'll get started right
away, shall we?' Before Clegg could reply, the Doctor
wheeled forward a trolley bearing a load of intimidating
electronic equipment: The main feature was a metallic
helmet, rather like an ultra-modern ladies' hair-drier. It
was supported by an extensible arm, and linked to a series
of dials. Briskly the Doctor whisked the contraption
behind Clegg's chair and popped the helmet on his head.
   The Brigadier looked on in total bafflement.
   `What is all that stuff, Doctor?'
   `Oh, I've designed one or two bits of equipment,' the
Doctor explained airily. `This is my improved version of
the electro-encephalograph. It'll measure his brainwaves as
we carry out the tests.' He turned to Clegg, who was
cowering nervously under the helmet. `Shall we try a little
simple psychometry? Perhaps you'd lend Mr. Clegg your
watch, Brigadier?'
   If the Brigadier had any doubts about Clegg's powers,
they were finally disposed of in the next few minutes.
Holding the watch in his hands, Clegg closed his eyes and
said slowly, `This watch was given to you a few years ago...
somewhere by the sea. Brighton, was it? A young lady
called Doris... `
   Very embarrassed by this reminder of his days as a gay
young subaltern, the Brigadier almost snatched the watch
back. `All true!' he said hurriedly. `Absolutely spot on.' He
shot the Doctor an appealing glance. `Surely you've got
enough, Doctor?'
   The Doctor chuckled. `A little too much, eh, Alastair?'
He made further adjustments to the electronic jumble on
the trolley, this time linking the metal helmet to a little
screen, rather like a mini TV set. `This is my IRIS
machine, Mr. Clegg. Image Reproduction Integrating
System. It will translate your thoughts into pictures on this
screen. Now, try this.'
   The Doctor handed Clegg a strange device. It was
shaped like a very slim torch, with numerous mysterious
attachments. This was the Doctor's trusty sonic screw-
driver, a multi-purpose tool that had been his companion
on many adventures.
   Clegg held the little device in his hands. A flood of
terrifying images rushed into his mind. On the little TV
screen patterns began to swirl... The head of a terrifying
monster swam up, roaring ferociously, gnashing row upon
row of jagged teeth. Clegg gasped and let go of the sonic
screwdriver. The Doctor reached out a long arm and
caught the screwdriver as it dropped from the man's
fingers. Clegg gasped. `That thing... what was it?'
   `A Drashig!' said the Doctor happily. `The most
ferocious omnivore in the cosmos. Don't worry, Mr. Clegg,
you're doing very well. But perhaps we'd better find you a
less alarming subject...'
   As if on cue, Sergeant Benton entered the laboratory. He
was carrying a small parcel. He saluted the Brigadier, and
then looked with interest at the figure of Clegg sitting
under the metal helmet. `Going in for a bit of hairdressing,
Doctor?' he asked amiably. Catching the Brigadier's
warning frown, he went on hurriedly, `Parcel just arrived,
sir. Thought it might be urgent.'
   `For the Doctor, or for me?' snapped the Brigadier.
   `For all of us, sir, in a way. It's addressed to the Doctor,
or Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart, or Captain Yates, or
Sergeant Benton!'
   The Doctor was making further adjustments to the
tangle of his electronic equipment. `Open it!' he suggested.
Then he straightened up. `No, wait a moment.' He took the
parcel from Benton and handed it to Clegg.
   `See what you can do with this, my dear chap.'
   Clegg took the parcel and turned it over and over in his
hands. On the IRIS screen the image of a strange, alien
landscape began to form.
   `This has come a long way,' said Clegg slowly. `From
beyond the stars... a meteorite... no it's a gemstone... a blue
jewel!'
   `Of course!' said the Doctor. He took the parcel from
Clegg and tore off the wrappings to reveal a battered
cardboard box. He lifted the lid and found a folded letter.
Beneath it, resting in a bed of cotton wool, lay the blue
crystal from Metebelis Three.
   Jo's parcel had arrived.

                           *****

Sarah Jane Smith was beginning to wonder if she had been
wasting her time after all. Shortly after the mysteriously
vanishing tractor had so nearly caused the crash, Mike
Yates had driven her to a big old country mansion set in
rambling, overgrown grounds. He had introduced her to a
beaming little monk called Cho-Je, who had discoursed to
her at some lengths on such subjects as `the fullness of the
void' and `the emptiness of the ten thousand things'. Sarah
hadn't understood a word of it, and had said so. With an
infectious giggle, Cho-Je had said delightedly, `Quite right!
The Dharma that can be spoken is no true Dharma!' and
had packed her off with Mike Yates for a tour of the
meditation centre.
   Mike had shown her the big hushed library, with its
rows upon rows of esoteric books. She had visited the
simple meditation rooms, where little groups of men sat
cross-legged, sometimes in complete silence, and some-
times chanting softly. `What are they meditating about?'
she had asked.
   Mike had given her a pitying look. `Not about any-thing.
They're just... meditating. It's an exercise in awareness!'
   Having apparently seen everything there was to see,
Mike was now leading her along a corridor at the back of
the house. He looked at his watch. `Come on. Time we hid
ourselves in the cellar.'
   `Good,' said Sarah, hoping they were at last reaching the
purpose of her visit. Certainly, she'd seen nothing sinister
so far. Indeed, the child-like happiness of Cho-Je had
impressed her enormously, though she was as far as ever
from grasping how he'd attained it.
   They turned a corner and ran slap into two men. The
one in front, a middle-aged man, was wearing a shabby
sports coat. He had a haggard, bitter face. A younger, weak-
looking man hovered behind him. Sarah shivered
involuntarily. Could these be their unknown enemies?
   Lupton gave them a thin smile. `Good afternoon, my
brother.' He raised his eyebrows enquiringly at Sarah.
Suddenly Yates found himself on the defensive.
   `This is Miss Smith,' he said. `From a London
magazine. Sarah, meet Mr. Lupton and Mr. Barnes.'
   Lupton nodded condescendingly. `Cho-Je told me you
were coming. I trust you have had a pleasant visit?'
   Sarah decided she didn't care for Mr. Lupton. She
didn't like his appearance, or his manner. `Yes thank you,'
she said. Then she added in a deliberately challenging
tone, `After a very bad start.'
   Lupton gave her a look of supercilious enquiry that
verged on a sneer. `Indeed?'
   `We had an accident,' Sarah went on. `We were nearly
killed.'
   `You were lucky to escape,' said Lupton coldly. `The
roads round here can be very dangerous for visitors. Very
dangerous indeed.' The threatening tone was
unmistakable. `Won't you have a cup of tea before you go?'
   Yates grabbed Sarah by the arm. `I'm afraid Miss Smith
has to leave now, or she'll miss her train back to London.'
   Sarah refused to budge. `Nonsense, there's plenty of
time.'
   `I rather think you must have misread the time-table,'
said Yates firmly. He took Sarah's arm and almost dragged
her away.
   Lupton watched them go. He smiled bitterly. `You
know, Barnes, I don't think we'll have any more trouble.
That girl could have been dangerous ­ but our friend Mr.
Yates is scared out of his wits. Call the others ­ we carry on
as planned.'
   Barnes nodded and hurried off.
   In Mike Yates' car, Sarah was protesting vigorously.
`You say you want me to see for myself, then we just take
off. What's going on?'
   Mike started the engine and drove slowly out of the
front gates.
   `Look, Sarah, Lupton knew you were coming down. He
must have been responsible for that tractor hallucination.'
   Sarah looked at him in exasperation. `I'm sure he was.
But why should we let him scare us off?'
   `We're letting him think he's scared us off,' Yates
corrected her. `Now we double back on foot.'
   Sarah grinned. `Ah, the fiendish cunning of the man!'
she said admiringly.
   Yates turned left and left again, cut off the engine, and
coasted down the lane that ran round the back of the
house. The car drew up silently, close to the high wall that
surrounded the grounds. Yates stepped on to the bonnet,
and climbed on to the top of the wall. He extended a
helping hand to Sarah so that she could follow him. They
dropped down inside the grounds, and Yates led her
through a tangle of shrubbery to a back window. He
clambered through, and Sarah followed him.
   As she struggled through the little window and into the
corridor, the shadow of a hulking form fell over her. She
gasped, but Yates squeezed her arm reassuringly. `Hullo,
Tommy,' he said. Sarah saw a massive young man in old
corduroys and a shaggy roll-neck sweater. For all his size
and obvious strength, his round blue eyes held the simple
curiosity of a child.
   `Why you climbing in window?' he grunted.
   Yates looked at him in consternation. Tommy was quite
unpredictable. He might well raise a hullaballoo that
would wreck everything.
   `Playing a game?' asked Tommy.
   Yates nodded. `That's right, Tommy. Just a game!'
   `Tommy likes games. I'll play too.' He looked at them
hopefully. Mike gave Sarah a despairing glance.
   `The thing is, Tommy,' said Sarah confidingly, `the
name of the game is "Secrets". It's a secret that we're here.
You won't tell anyone, will you?'
   Tommy shook his head. His eye was attracted by the
sparkle of Sarah's brooch. He reached out to touch it, and
Sarah said gently, `Would you like it?' Tommy nodded
eagerly, and Sarah took off the brooch and handed it to
him. Delighted, Tommy grabbed it from her, and
wandered off down the corridor, totally absorbed in his
new prize.
   `A shameless display of feminine wiles!' said Mike.
`Come on.'
   As they approached the cellar, they could hear the
sound of low, rhythmic chanting. Mike opened the heavy
wooden door, took Sarah's arm and guided her into the
darkness. Just inside was the little landing where he had
hidden before. She gasped as something brushed across her
face. `Ugh! It's thick with spiders' webs!'
   `Sssh!' said Mike urgently. Cautiously they peered
round the turn of the wall.
   A circle of robed figures was seated round an ornate
symbol, a sort of silken poster which lay flat on the cellar
floor. She whispered in Mike's ear. `What's that they're
sitting round?'
   `It's called a mandala ­ a device for focussing their
concentration.'
   In the gloom of the cellar, Sarah could see Lupton
leading the chanting, with Barnes beside him. She had
seen most of the other men in her tour round the
monastery. The chanting was quickening its pace now,
building up a strange sense of foreboding. Sarah blinked.
An unearthly glow was spreading from the mandala in the
centre of the circle. A sense of dread began to flood over
her. Something evil was happening in the cellar, something
she didn't want to see. She felt an urge to run, but the
chanting held her in a hypnotic spell.

At exactly this time, the Doctor was finishing the letter
that had come with the parcel. He was reading it out to the
Brigadier and Sergeant Benton. `... and the Indian porters
are saying it's bad medicine ­ like it goes or they go!' The
Doctor frowned, reflecting that neither Jo's grammar nor
her handwriting had improved since she left UNIT. He
struggled to make out the hastily scrawled final paragraph.
`So, Doctor, if you're away on a cheap day trip to Mars or
something, perhaps you could look after it for me; or you,
Brigadier, if you're whooping it up in Geneva; or what
about you, my lovely Sergeant Benton?'
   Benton, who had been suppressing a grin at the
reference to his two superiors, blushed beneath his tan.
The Brigadier's lips twitched under his moustache, and the
Doctor puzzled over the last sentence...
   All three had forgotten Clegg, who, during the reading
of the long and rambling letter, had been sitting meekly
underneath the metal helmet. They hadn't noticed when
he had reached out and picked up the crystal, peering
curiously into its blue depths.
   Suddenly Clegg went rigid. He felt some tremendously
powerful force flooding into the room, a force that was
somehow working through the blue crystal in his hands.
   `Must go now or I'll miss the next cleft stick to
civilisation,' the Doctor read slowly. Suddenly an invisible
force swept through the room. The letter was plucked from
the Doctor's hand and swept up to the ceiling as if caught
in a powerful up-draught. It was followed by almost
everything else portable in the laboratory. Chairs, tables,
equipment, all swirled up in the air in a mad whirlpool.
The Doctor, Brigadier and Benton were flung across the
room. Clegg sat in his chair, motionless in the swirling
chaos around him.
   The mad whirlpool of objects suddenly stopped. Things
crashed to the floor, many of them smashing. The Doctor
looked round. The laboratory was a shambles. Benton and
the Brigadier were staggering to their feet. The Doctor
looked at Clegg, still sitting in his chair. `Mr. Clegg, are
you alright?'
   There was no reply. The Doctor came closer. The little
man was hunched forward in his chair, gazing into the
crystal. His face held an expression of unutterable horror.
He was quite dead.

In the cellar of the monastery, the chanting reached a
climax. Sarah was gripping Mike's arm hard enough to
bruise it, though neither one of them was aware of the fact.
The strange glow around the mandala seemed to condense
and solidify. A shape was forming. Sarah blinked again,
trying not to believe her eyes. But it was there, it was true.
Crouching on the mandala was an enormous spider...
                    3
          The Coming of the Spider
For a moment, the Spider crouched motionless on the
mandala. Lupton and his circle were paralysed with terror.
One man leaped to his feet and ran for the steps. A strand
of almost invisible white light snaked out from the Spider's
body. As it touched the fleeing man, he convulsed and
dropped to the floor.
   The Spider seemed to swing to and fro, as if scanning
the circle of men. No one dared to move. Lupton sat frozen
with the others, struggling to regain control of his will.
The forbidden books that he had stolen from Cho-Je's
library had warned that misuse of the Rituals of Power
could summon up demons. In his eagerness for wealth and
success, he had ignored the warnings. Now it seemed that
he was to pay the price of his rashness. He searched his
mind desperately for one of the Incantations of
Banishment. Finally, he assembled the words in his mind.
Moistening his lips he managed to croak out an
incantation that should have sent the creature back from
whence it came. It had absolutely no effect. Instead,
Lupton felt an icy tendril of thought reaching out to touch
his mind. Then the Spider spoke to him. Not out loud, of
course, but inside his head. Her voice ­ somehow Lupton
knew that the creature was female ­ was clear, sweet and
icily evil...
   `Lupton! I have come to give you the power you seek.
Why do you try to send me away? Turn around.'
   Wincing from the alien intruder in his mind, Lupton
didn't move. The Spider spoke again, her voice sharp and
commanding. `Turn around, I say.'
   Slowly Lupton turned his back. To their horror, those
in the circle saw the Spider quiver for a moment and then
spring at Lupton's back. For a moment it seemed to cling
between his shoulder blades, then it vanished.
    Lupton stood stooped for a moment. Then he
straightened up and turned round. His voice was calm and
authoritative. `All of you ­ go back to your rooms. You will
say nothing of what has happened here.'
    Barnes indicated the man crumpled at the foot of the
cellar steps. `What about him? Is he dead?'
    Lupton shook his head. `He is simply unconscious.
Take him to his room. He will wake soon and remember
nothing.'
    Obedient to the authority in Lupton's voice, some of the
little group began to lift the body.
    Meanwhile, Mike Yates and Sarah were hurrying along
the corridor. `Hadn't you better come away with me?'
Sarah was asking.
    Mike shook his head. `It's better if you go by yourself.
I'll stay and keep an eye on things here. You let the Doctor
and the Brigadier know what's going on.'
    `But, Mike ­ I don't know what's going on.'
    They reached the window by which they had entered,
and Mike opened it so Sarah could climb out. `Just tell
them everything you saw.'
    `What are you going to do?'
    `I'm going to try and see the Abbot, tell him all about it.
Now, off you go! Here ­ take my car.' He handed her the
keys.
    Sarah saw he was determined. `All right, Mike, I'm
going. Take care of yourself.'
    She disappeared out of the window, and Mike closed it
behind her.
    For a moment he hesitated, wondering what to do next.
Should he tackle the Abbot right away? No, better wait.
Lupton and his lot might still be on the prowl. Just before
bedtime when everything was quiet, that would be the best
time... Suddenly he heard voices' coming towards him ­
Lupton and Barnes! Hurriedly, Mike made off in the
opposite direction.
   Barnes was still desperately trying to get some kind of
sense out of his friend and leader. Lupton seemed full of a
vast, unshakable confidence. He talked airily of the, most
grandiose plans, of wealth and power unlimited, in the
tones of one who held the world in the palm of his. hand.
   Barnes was a good deal less happy. `But that spider,' he
persisted. `What was it? One of those Tibetan demons the
books warned us about?'
   Lupton smiled. `No doubt our friend Cho-Je would say
that. But he would be wrong.'
   `Where did it go?'
   `My dear Barnes, it didn't go anywhere. It's still here!'
   `You can feel it ­ on your back?'
   `Not on my back. In my mind. I can hear it speak to!
me.'
   Inside Lupton's head, the icy voice said, `This man is
stupid ­ send him away.'
   Barnes saw Lupton's eyes close in concentration, and
asked, `Was it speaking to you then? What did it say?'
   `It said you looked tired. You should go to your room
and rest. That's what I'm going to do.'
   Lupton patted Barnes on the shoulder and urged him
towards the stairs. `Now don't worry. I know what I'm
doing...'

                         *****

Later that same evening, Benton moved slowly about the
laboratory, setting things back in place. The Doctor was
sitting on a stool, gazing bleakly into the distance. Benton
understood that the death of the Professor had hit him
hard.
   The Brigadier came in and said briskly, `Packed off that
police chappy at last. According to the post mortem, it was
a natural death. Poor chap had a weak heart.'
   `Perhaps he did,' said the Doctor grimly, `but I'm still
responsible, you know. I gave him the crystal to look at ­
and something he saw while he was holding it gave him
such a shock that his heart gave out. It killed him.'
   `The same something that turned the place upside
down,' said Benton.
   The Doctor nodded. `A tremendous explosion of
psychokinetic force... Wait a moment ­ there's just a
chance...'
   The Brigadier felt very irritated by all this mystery. `A
chance of what, Doctor?'
   The Doctor was busily sorting out his tangle of
electronic equipment, now back on its trolley. `He was still
attached to the IRIS machine when he died. It should have
recorded his thoughts for us ­ if it hasn't been shaken up
too badly.' The Doctor turned the machine on and
adjusted the controls. It gave out a high-pitched electronic
noise, like a tape being wound backwards at high speed.
The Doctor twiddled a bit more, and blurred pictures
began to form on the little screen. The Brigadier peered
over the Doctor's shoulder, trying to make sense of the
distorted shapes: shapes with round furry bodies, and
many legs. `Bless my soul,' said the Brigadier, `looks like a
lot of...'
   `Spiders!' said the Doctor. `Now why should the crystal
have made the poor chap think of spiders?' He stood
brooding for a moment, then said decisively, `Only one
thing to do ­ I shall have to look into the crystal for
myself.'
   Benton and the Brigadier both started to protest.
   `Far too dangerous,' snapped the Brigadier.
   `Let me have a go,' said Benton.
   The Doctor ignored them. `Don't you see? A man's
dead, and I'm responsible. The least I can do is find out
what happened, and why.' He reached for the crystal and
then paused ­ `There is one thing you could do for me,
Sergeant Benton. I'd just love another cup of your excellent
coffee.'
   With a worried glance at the Brigadier, Benton hurried
from the laboratory. The Doctor picked up the blue crystal
and put it on the bench before him. Climbing back on to
his stool, he rested his elbows on the bench, his chin in his
hands, and gazed into the crystal's shimmering blue
depths. The Brigadier looked on uneasily, pacing about the
laboratory. The Doctor sat motionless. The silence
stretched on and on until the Brigadier couldn't stand the
suspense any longer. He cleared his throat noisily. `Any
luck, Doctor?'
    No answer. The Brigadier came closer, and peered at the
Doctor cautiously. He was still hunched over the crystal.
He wasn't moving. As far as the Brigadier could see, he
wasn't even breathing. Blue flames seemed to dance and
flicker in the heart of the blue jewel...

                          *****

Lupton lay day-dreaming on his bed, hands behind his
head. His mind was full of the wealth and power that
would soon be his. How exactly this was to come about he
was not quite sure. But it would happen. The Spider had
promised. Suddenly an agonising mental pang jerked him
into full consciousness. He spoke to the unseen being in
his mind. `What is it?'
   `The crystal. I can feel it. Concentrate, Lupton.
Concentrate!'
   `What crystal?'
   The cold voice vibrated with urgency. `That is why I
have come. To find the crystal and get it back. It will give
us power. The power we both seek. Concentrate!'
   Lupton's face twisted with effort as the Spider joined
her mind to his.
   `I see a man,' he said slowly. `A man gazing into a blue
jewel... A man they call the Doctor...'

                          *****
`Doctor!' said the Brigadier urgently. Then again, louder,
`Doctor!' The Doctor didn't so much as twitch. Benton
hurried in with a tray holding three steaming coffee mugs.
He put the tray down on the bench, close to the Doctor.
   `Here we are, Doctor ­ coffee up.'
   `No use talking to him,' said the Brigadier. `Looks as if
we've got an emergency on our hands. Damn silly thing to
do, said so all along. I'd better get the Medical Officer.' He
picked up the internal phone, dialled, and said, `Dr
Sweetman ­ get over here to the laboratory right away ­'
   `Sir ­ look!' whispered Benton urgently.
   A wisp of steam from one of the coffee mugs was
floating up under the Doctor's nose. And the nose was
twitching! Suddenly, the Doctor blinked, reached for a
coffee mug, took a long swig and said, `Delicious! You
know, Sergeant Benton, next to Mrs. Samuel Pepys, you
make the best cup of coffee I've ever tasted.' He took
another swig.
   The Brigadier snapped into the phone. `Never mind, Dr
Sweetman, the emergency seems to be over.' He slammed
the receiver down and said, `Now, Doctor, never mind the
dratted coffee, what about the crystal? Did you see spiders,
too?'
   The Doctor shook his head. He rose, stretched and went
over to the window.
   `When I was young,' he said, as if continuing a previous
conversation, `an old hermit lived half-way up a mountain
behind our house. It was from him that I first learnt to
look into my own mind.'
   The Brigadier seemed singularly unimpressed by this
reminiscence. `What did you see in the crystal, Doctor?'
   `That's what I'm trying to tell you. I saw the face of my
old teacher.' The Doctor turned, and his voice was very
serious. `Do you know, Brigadier, I've got a feeling I'm
about to be faced with the worst threat, the greatest danger,
of my entire life. It was as if that old hermit was reaching
out across the years to help me...'
                          *****

Outside the door of the Abbot's private suite, Mike Yates
was arguing with Cho-Je ­ and finding it a hopeless task.
`See K'anpo Rimpoche?' The little monk was scandalised.
`No, no, of course not. You know our Abbot is in seclusion.
He sees no one.'
    `But it's very important,' Yates protested.
    `Nothing is important, Mr. Yates, except to strive,' Cho-
Je giggled disconcertingly, `for enlightment, that is. As for
this spider demon you think you have seen, many strange
things will appear to you in meditation. You must ­ what
is the word ­ salute them and walk on. Go to bed, Mr.
Yates!'
    Cho-Je smiled benignly and disappeared down the
corridor. As soon as the little monk was out of sight, Yates
reached determinedly for the Abbot's door. A massive form
loomed up behind him, and a huge hairy paw grasped his
wrist. It was Tommy.
    `Cho-Je say go to bed, Yates.'
    `Listen, Tommy, I've got to talk to K'anpo.'
    `K'anpo Tommy's friend. He like to be alone. Go to bed.
I fetch Cho-Je ­ or I hit you.'
    Tommy raised an enormous fist, and Yates stepped
back. `All right, Tommy.'
    The fist was lowered and Tommy looked pleased.
`Good. I don't like to hit you.' He settled his huge
shoulders against the Abbot's door, obviously a fixture for
the night.
    Yates sighed and walked away. There didn't seem to be
very much he could do. Cho-Je wouldn't listen, and he'd
never reach the Abbot without clobbering Tommy, which
seemed a bit extreme even if he could manage it. Deciding
to live to fight another day, Yates headed for his room,
hoping Sarah would have better luck in convincing the
Doctor. As he started up the main stair-case, he met
Lupton coming down.
   Yates looked at him curiously. Lupton seemed in a state
of exaltation. His eyes were glittering.
   `Time for all good little boys to go to bed, eh, Mr.
Yates?'
   `What about you?'
   `Just a little constitutional. Goodnight, Mr. Yates.'
   Mike Yates climbed the stairs to bed, and Lupton
walked out of the front door. As he made for his car, he
could still hear the cold clear voice inside his head. `Hurry,
Lupton, we must find the man with the crystal. We must
find him and take it from him!'
   `Suppose he doesn't want to part with it?'
   The Spider's voice was matter of fact. `Nothing matters
except the crystal. If the Doctor resists us, you must kill
him.'
                      4
           The Chase for the Crystal
When Sarah called on the Doctor early next morning, she
found him hard at work in his laboratory. On one of the
benches, he had rigged up a riot of wires and condensers,
connected at one end to a little monitor screen, and at the
other to the blue crystal from Metebelis Three.
   Thinking over the baffling events of the previous day,
the Doctor had realised first that the crystal was somehow
at the centre of things, and second that he didn't know
nearly enough about it. He'd taken the crystal from
Metebelis to study it, having searched carefully for a jewel
with exactly the right characteristics. But although he had
sometimes made use of the crystal's strange powers, he had
never really investigated it properly. On a sudden impulse,
he had given it to Jo Grant for her wedding present, she
had taken it to South America, and then he'd forgotten all
about it.
   Now, eager to make up for lost time, the Doctor was
subjecting the crystal to a full electronic analysis, with the
aid of one of his own inimitable lash-ups of improvised
scientific equipment.
   Eagerly, Sarah poured out the whole story of her trip to
the monastery. The Doctor appeared to be listening keenly,
nodding his head intelligently from time to time, and
encouraging her to continue with occasional `ums' and
`ahs'. She came to the end of her story, and looked at him
expectantly.     `Fascinating!'     he    said.   `Absolutely
fascinating!'
   Sarah smiled, pleased that the Doctor didn't think she'd
been wasting his time. The Doctor looked up at her and
said solemnly, `The crystal lattice is absolutely balanced,
right and left.'
   Sarah groaned, realising he hadn't heard a single word
of her story. The Doctor looked at her, puzzled because she
didn't seem to share his pleasure. `It's a scientific pun,' he
explained. `Coherent thought!'
    `Doctor! What about this man Lupton? What about this
giant spider that jumped on his back and vanished?'
    The Doctor stared vacantly at her for a moment and
then said thoughtfully:
    `It's probably analagous to the laser...' He bent over his
apparatus and adjusted controls. Blue sparks flickered
round the crystal, and a complicated pattern of wave-traces
flickered across the screen.
    Sarah glared at his back, tempted to crown him with one
of his own bunsen burners. Suddenly, the Doctor looked
up at her and said urgently, `Spiders? Did you say
spiders?? Giant spiders?'
    Sarah nodded weakly.
    The Doctor came up to her and put his hands on her
shoulders, his face very grave. `Now, Sarah,' he said
solemnly, `I want you to tell me the whole story, right from
the beginning.'
    Sarah sighed, and started all over again. `Well, I got this
call from Mike Yates ­ he was down at this meditation
centre place...'

Corporal Hodges, Unit Transport Section, gave the
Doctor's new car a wipe with a damp cloth, and stepped
back to admire his work. He always enjoyed looking after
the Doctor's personal transport. Like the Doctor himself, it
had character. First there had been Bessie, the old
Edwardian roadster with the amazing turn of speed. Now
there was this new car. Well, you couldn't exactly call it a
car. More like a cross between a flying saucer and a
hovercraft.
   Reflected in the gleaming surface of the vehicle, Hodges
saw someone coming towards him. It was a stranger, a
middle-aged man in a shabby sports jacket.
   `He's got a nerve,' thought Hodges, `walking in as if he
owned the place.'
    Although UNIT was a semi-secret organisation, Hodges
nevertheless wasn't particularly alarmed or surprised. No
attempt had been made to disguise the fact that the H.Q.
was a military establishment of some kind. Getting into the
outer areas was comparatively easy. Access to the inner
security area was impossible ­ unless you had the right
credentials.
    Hodges straightened up as the man approached. `Can I
help you, sir?'
    The man stopped. `I'm looking for the Doctor.'
    `Dr Sweetman, sir? The Medical Officer?'
    The man paused. It seemed almost as if he were
listening to some inner voice.
    `No... ` he said slowly, `the ­ other Doctor.'
    `Ah, the Scientific Adviser.' That explained it, thought
Hodges. All sorts of weird people turned up to see the
Doctor. `You'll find him through that door over there, sir.
Turn left and left again when you get inside.'
    The man nodded his thanks and moved away. Hodges
said, `Excuse me, sir!'
    The man stopped. He glared at Hodges impatiently.
`Well?'
    `Could I see your pass please, sir?'
    `Pass?'
    `Can't go into the Central buildings without a pass.
Didn't they give you one at the main gate?'
    `Oh yes. Yes, of course.' The man reached for his pocket.
Suddenly he stretched out his hand in a curious pointing
gesture. A thread of fire snaked from his finger-tips, and
blasted Hodges into unconsciousness. Lupton turned and
ran for the door into the main building.
    `So you see,' the Doctor was saying, `poor Professor
Clegg saw spiders before he died, and you saw spiders at
the monastery. There must be a connection. And it has to
be this crystal!'
    Sarah looked at the blue gem, sitting incongruously
amongst the tangle of electronic equipment. `Where did it
come from anyway?'
   `I brought it back some time ago, from a planet called
Metebelis Three.'
   Briefly, the Doctor told Sarah the history of the jewel,
and of its strange power to affect the mind.
   `You mean it could, well, drive someone mad?'
   `Just the opposite. It clears the mind, and amplifies its
powers.'
   `But it could be used for evil purposes?'
   `Oh yes. If the minds using it were motivated by evil...'
   Sarah shivered. `The minds of the giant spiders on
Metebelis Three?'
   `That's just it,' said the Doctor. `There aren't any.'
   In the corridors nearby, Lupton moved cautiously on
his way. `Nearer,' said the voice of the Spider inside his
head. `We are getting closer ­ we are almost there.'
Following its directions, Lupton came nearer and nearer to
the Doctor's laboratory. Suddenly, a big man in army
uniform came round the corner and stood in front of him.
   `Excuse me, sir, you're in a security area. May I see your
pass?'
   Lupton ignored him, and went on. Sergeant Benton was
outraged. Automatically, he drew his revolver. `Halt, or I
fire!' Lupton swung round and stretched out his hand.
Benton was slammed to the ground by what felt like a
massive electric shock, and Lupton ran on.
   `Land squids with great hairy tentacles,' the Doctor
said. `Giant snakes, an eagle the size of a house... but no
spiders. In fact, no really intelligent life at all.' The Doctor
rubbed his chin. `Wait a minute, though ­ there could be a
time difference!'
   As an old friend of the Doctor, Sarah took the concept
of time travel for granted. `You mean the spiders come
from an earlier period than the time of your visit?'
   `That's right. Or a later one.'
   Unseen by the Doctor or Sarah, a face appeared at the
glass partition dividing the laboratory from the corridor. It
was Lupton. He could see the crystal glowing on the
laboratory bench. It was almost within his grasp.
    `It's there,' he whispered. `A blue crystal. It must be the
one!'
    `Concentrate!' said the Spider's voice inside his head.
`You must concentrate.'
    The Doctor and Sarah were looking at the crystal too.
`Let's assume there are intelligent giant spiders on
Metebelis Three,' said the Doctor matter-of-factly. `Then
why is there all this activity? Unless...'
    `Unless what?'
    `Unless,' said the Doctor slowly, `they want the crystal
back...'
    As he spoke, the crystal vanished before their eyes.
    In fact, it hadn't travelled very far. It was resting in the
palm of Lupton's hand just a few feet away, snatched there
by the Spider's power of teleportation. Lupton was looking
at it in incredulous triumph, when Benton staggered round
the corner.
    Thanks to his size and strength, he had recovered from
the Spider's blast far quicker than most men could have
done. But he was still a little shaky. Quickly, Lupton
shoved him aside, and hurried past. Benton took a wild
shot, but missed by several yards. He was just about to set
off in pursuit when the Doctor and Sarah shot out of the
laboratory. The Doctor grabbed him by the shoulder,
steadying him. `What happened, old chap?'
    `Some bloke ­ stranger,' gasped Benton. `He's got your
crystal! Come on.'
    All three set off in pursuit.
    Lupton ran back through the door by which he had
entered the building. He was half-way across the car-park
and heading for the gate by the time the Doctor, Sarah and
Benton reached the same door. To the Doctor's delight, he
saw the Brigadier turn in through the gate. The Doctor
cupped his hands and bellowed, Brigadier! Stop that man!'
    Confused but willing, the Brigadier drew his revolver
and yelled, `Halt!'
    He fired a warning shot over Lupton's head. Lupton
skidded to a stop. He turned to go back, only to see the
Doctor, Benton and Sarah heading towards him.
    Automatically, he raised his hand, expecting the Spider
to give him the power to blast them down. But the voice
inside his head said, `No! They are too many and too
distant. We must escape.'
    Lupton looked round wildly. The big car park was full
of army vehicles of all kinds; landrovers, motor-bikes, a
staff car, even a little one-man helicopter. The nearest, and
the fastest-looking, was a low, almost circular vehicle
which resembled an ultra-modern racing car. Lupton
sprinted to it, pulled back the entrance hatch, and jumped
in.
    The Doctor, to his vast indignation, saw his pride and
joy, his new experimental car, being driven out of the
gates. The Brigadier had to jump aside as the strange-
looking vehicle whizzed past him. Automatically he raised
his revolver to shoot at the tyres, and then realised that the
blessed thing hadn't got any tyres! The Doctor said in an
anguished voice, `Don't shoot, Brigadier, you'll damage my
new car!'
    Sarah and Benton came speeding up to the gate in
Bessie. The Doctor glanced round the car-park. He
indicated the little helicopter. `You three get after him in
Bessie. I'll spot him from the air and guide you.'
    The little group broke up. The Doctor ran for the
helicopter, and the Brigadier with a crisp, `Move over,
Benton,' got behind the wheel of Bessie. The little roadster
shot off after Lupton.
    The Doctor swung his long legs into the cockpit of the
little helicopter. Looking like a large, unwieldy dragon-fly,
it took off with a shattering roar, and was soon climbing
steeply over the UNIT car-park.
    The Doctor looked down at the countryside beneath,
the roads spread out like a map. He soon spotted his stolen
car, and the bright yellow shape of Bessie in hot pursuit.
From the Doctor's vantage point it was clear that the
newer vehicle was slowly drawing ahead. Poor old Bessie
just hadn't got the power. The Doctor flipped the switch of
his intercom. `Hullo, Brigadier, is this thing working? Can
you hear me?'
    The Brigadier's voice crackled back. `Loud and clear,
Doctor. We're on his tail.'
    `Yes, but he's getting away from you. Take the next
right fork and you'll be able to cut him off.'
    A Police Panda car was tucked into the side of the little
country lane. The driver was having a quiet doze before
returning to the hurly-burly of the main road. Suddenly he
jerked awake as two very odd-looking vehicles flashed past.
He grabbed his radio-mike, too shaken to observe correct
procedure. `Listen, there's a sort of silver hovercraft being
chased by an old crock. They're both doing about ninety!'
The policeman instinctively ducked, as something whirred
over his head, then added to his message. `And there's a
little tiny helicopter after 'em both. I'm in pursuit. Over.'
    The flat voice of the base radio operator droned in reply,
`Thank you, X-ray Tango. Your message is timed at ­'
Suddenly the voice broke off, became human. `Oy! What
did you say?' But the policeman was too busy driving to
reply.
    The Brigadier took the next right fork, as the Doctor
had suggested, but Lupton's extra speed was just too much
for them. The silvery shape whizzed past their bonnet
before they could cut him off. The Brigadier cursed,
muttered an apology to Sarah ­ who was clinging petrified
to Benton's arm ­ swung the car round, and set off again
after Lupton. By now their quarry was out of sight, but
soon the Doctor's voice crackled in their ears. `He's about
half a mile in front of you. He's turned off to the left.'
    The chase went on. For all her old-fashioned
appearance, Bessie was capable of an amazing turn of
speed. But the Doctor's newest creation, with its more
powerful engine and streamlined shape, was just too much
for her. Thanks to the Doctor's spotting from overhead,
they never entirely lost heir quarry, but it was getting
increasingly obvious that they didn't have very much
chance of catching him either.
   Lupton, crouched behind the padded wheel of the
Doctor's car, soon made the connection between the
maddening persistence of his followers and the helicopter
which buzzed overhead. What he needed was cover. He
made for the open ground ahead of him. Perhaps one of
those clumps of trees...
   A few minutes later, Bessie bumped across a patch of
rough heathland and drew up beside the Doctor's stolen
car. It was parked, empty, at the edge of a patch of
woodland. The Brigadier stood up in Bessie's front seat,
and looked around him. Lupton was nowhere to be seen.
`Pretty cunning move,' thought the Brigadier. `While he
was driving that car of the Doctor's we could see him even
if we couldn't catch him. But an ordinary looking man in
everyday clothes is much harder to find. Let the fellow
reach any sort of town and he'll disappear like a piece of
straw in a haystack.'
   There came a roar from overhead, and a sudden fierce
wind, as the Doctor touched down in his little helicopter.
He leaped out of the cockpit and raced across to them.
`Gone!' said the Brigadier with a sweeping gesture at the
rough country that surrounded them.
   `So he has,' said the Doctor. `We'll just have to look for
him!'
   `I'll rustle up a patrol,' said the Brigadier. `He won't
have got far.'
   (The Brigadier's words were truer than he realised.
Lupton was crouched, still as a rabbit, in a fold of ground
not very far away. His old brown sports jacket blended
almost perfectly with his surroundings.)
   They heard the sound of another car engine, and a
police car jolted across the heath towards them. The
policeman got out, and produced his notebook. The people
were as peculiar as the vehicles, he thought. A full-blown
general (or something), a bloke in fancy dress, with a
trendy-looking bird. In a voice of official severity the
policeman said, `I'll thank you all for a few particulars. You
were touching ninety back there... `
   From his hiding place, Lupton peered out at the little
group. They were arguing with the policeman, everyone
apparently talking at once. `This is the diversion we need,'
said the icy voice inside Lupton's head. `We can escape in
the flying vehicle.'
   `But I don't know how to fly it.'
   `I will guide your hands,' said the Spider. `Come!'
   The Brigadier had placated angry Prime Ministers in
his time, but an English policeman in hot pursuit of a
motoring offence was beyond his powers. `Alastair
Lethbridge-Stewart, eh?' said the policeman in tones that
indicated he suspected it of being an alias. `Would you
mind spelling that, sir?'
   It was Sarah who spotted Lupton as he broke from cover
and dashed for the helicopter. `Hey,' she yelled, tugging
the Doctor's sleeve. Immediately the policeman found
himself with no one to question, as they all ran to try and
head off Lupton. The Doctor was in the lead, but as he
reached out to grab the door Lupton slammed it shut, and
the helicopter became airborne with a shattering roar. The
blast of the take-off bowled the Doctor over, and by the
time he was on his feet again Lupton was climbing steeply.
Soon he was no more than a dot in the sky.
   The Doctor started running towards the futuristic-
looking craft that Lupton had first stolen. Sarah was close
behind him and, as he leaped into the driving seat, she
scrambled into the passenger seat beside him. `You're not
going without me, Doctor,' she said, before he could
protest.
   The Doctor grinned, his face alight with the joy of the
chase. `Suit yourself,' he yelled, and closed the hatch over
their heads. `Fasten your safety belt!' The car sped away
across the heath.
   From her seat beside the Doctor, Sarah looked down at
the ground rushing away beneath them. She wondered how
they could go so fast and so smoothly over such rough
terrain. Suddenly she realised that the ground really was
beneath them, and was receding more and more... `Doctor,'
she yelled, `we're flying!'
   The Doctor concentrated his attention on the wealth of
controls set into the crowded dashboard in front of him ­
controls, Sarah realised, which looked far more suited to
the cockpit of a jet plane than to any car. `Well of course
we're flying,' he said reasonably. `How are we going to
catch him if we don't?'
   Notebook limp in his hand, the policeman stood gaping
as the silvery shape disappeared into the sky like the flying
saucer it so much resembled. He turned to demand an
explanation, but the two soldiers were already back inside
the tatty old roadster, shooting off into the distance. The
policeman sighed. He walked back to his car on legs that
felt suddenly a little wobbly. He picked up the radio mike
and said, `X-ray Tango to control. Can I come in please? I
don't feel very well.'
   Lupton sat at the controls feeling like a kind of
automatic pilot. His hands seemed to know exactly what to
do, even though the brain that controlled them was not his
own. He began to relax a little, confident that they had
shaken off the Doctor. Suddenly, a silver shape swept
clown from the sky above and buzzed him, missing, it
seemed, by inches.
   The Doctor gave Sarah an exultant smile and said, `That
gave him a turn! Came down at him out of the sun. The
Red Baron was very fond of that particular trick.' The
Doctor's long fingers flicked over the controls, and their
craft seemed to hover over the little helicopter. `He'll have
to land soon,' said the Doctor confidently. `He must be
almost out of fuel. Those things don't hold much.'
    Suddenly Lupton became aware of an ugly change in
the engine note. One of the dials in front of him was
flickering to zero. `We're out of fuel!' he yelled.
    `Land,' ordered the Spider, `there by the water.' Below
them stretched the estuary of a biggish river, which wound
its way across the countryside. Lupton felt his hand move
over the controls, and the ground came suddenly nearer.
    Hovering above him, the Doctor said, `You see, he's
landing.' He started to glide down in pursuit of the
helicopter. From her window, Sarah saw the helicopter
land by the sprawling buildings of a boat yard. Lupton
jumped to the ground and dodged out of sight. The Doctor
landed his craft close to the helicopter. He and Sarah
jumped out. `Wait here,' snapped the Doctor. Before Sarah
could protest, he set off after Lupton on foot.
    Bob Armitage, the owner of the boat yard, was mooring
his motorboat at the landing stage, congratulating himself
on a well-spent morning. Recently he'd taken the gamble
of ordering a line of one-man hovercraft, and at this very
moment Mr. Pemberthy, a wealthy local resident, was
completing a test run. Bob was sure from the man's
reaction that the sale was in the bag. Sure enough, a
moment later, Pemberthy steered the little hovercraft up to
the landing stage, his face wreathed in smiles. `Fantastic,
Bob! Wish I could buy a dozen of 'em. As it is, I'll have to
make do with one!'
    Bob finished mooring his motorboat, and took the line
that Pemberthy threw him from the hovercraft. As he
started to make it fast, a man dashed out from nowhere,
shoved him clean off the jetty and into the water, and
jumped into the motorboat. Bob disappeared into the river
with a colossal splash. The astonished Pemberthy climbed
out of the hovercraft and prepared to grapple with the
intruder. But the stranger raised his hand in a pointing
gesture, and Pemberthy was blasted from the jetty. Bob
Armitage, now treading water, swam over to the
unconscious Pemberthy, grabbed him and started pulling
him ashore. The motorboat roared away upstream.
    A second man, tall and white-haired, came running
along the jetty, jumped into the hovercraft, and roared
away after the motorboat.
    The Doctor spared a moment from his pursuit of
Lupton to appreciate the hovercraft: nice, nippy little
thing, a pleasure to drive. He wondered if he could talk the
Brigadier into getting one for UNIT. Bound to come in
useful.
    He rounded a bend in the twisting river, and saw
Lupton speeding away in front of him. The Doctor realised
that the conditions of the chase were now reversed. Lupton
had the larger, more powerful transport, and the Doctor
had to rely on superior skill to give him a chance of
catching up. Lupton was drawing steadily ahead. Soon he
would be out of sight, able to abandon the motor-boat, and
make off inland.
    Suddenly, the Doctor grinned. The river in front of
them wound to and fro in a series of S-bends. Lupton had
to follow those bends. But the Doctor didn't! He was in a
hovercraft. Land and water were all the same to him. The
Doctor swung the little hovercraft up the bank, across the
road, over a field (and, quite without realising it, over a
very astonished sleeping tramp)' and back on to the river.
By cutting off the bend, he had gained a considerable
distance. Now he was right on Lupton's tail.
    Behind the wheel of the powerful boat, Lupton was
filled with despair. The man wasn't human. Would he
never give up? `He'll catch us!' he told his unseen
companion. The Spider's voice was as icily calm as ever.
`Then I will summon help. I must contact the source of
power. Help me. Concentrate.'
    The Doctor repeated his land-hopping manoeuvre, this
time giving a homeward-bound herd of cows a very nasty
shock. He cut off another bend, gained even more distance
and emerged back on the river, level with Lupton's boat.
The two craft veered towards each other on a collision
course. The Doctor saw that Lupton wasn't even steering.
He crouched in the motorboat, gripping the wheel and
staring ahead like a man in a trance. The Doctor brought
his hovercraft alongside, matched speeds, and took a flying
leap... He landed in the back of Lupton's boat, staggered,
and recovered his balance. He turned to grapple with
Lupton ­ but there was no Lupton. No one was manning
the controls; no one swam or floated in the water nearby:
Lupton had vanished.
                     5
         The Council of the Spiders
Lupton was almost as surprised as the Doctor. One
moment, capture seemed certain. He had been in the
motorboat, desperately gripping the wheel. He could see
the Doctor jumping towards him from the hovercraft.
Then everything went blank and he once more stood in the
familiar corridor of the monastery, stone flagstones
beneath his feet.
   Lupton reeled, holding a hand out to the wall to support
himself. He looked round to get his bearings. He was just
by the back stairs, close to the cellar. He blinked
incredulously. It was real. It was true. He had escaped! A
sudden thought struck him. He reached in his jacket
pocket and took out the crystal. The blue jewel sparkled in
a shaft of sunlight from a nearby window. Lupton smiled
to himself, replaced the jewel in his pocket, and hurried
towards his room.
   The door to the old cupboard under the stairs opened a
crack, and Tommy peeped out. He rubbed a massive hand
over his forehead. His face wrinkled with the effort of
thought. It wasn't so much Lupton's popping up from
nowhere that bothered him. Most things in life were a
mystery to Tommy, and nearly everyone seemed to have
powers he couldn't master ­ things like reading and
writing. No, it was the blue jewel. He had never seen
anything so beautiful in his life. He had to have it...
Moving silently, for all his size, Tommy followed Lupton
down the corridor.
   As Lupton was about to enter his room, Cho-Je passed
him with a smile and a nod. Lupton forced himself to
smile back, and hurriedly opened the door. Safely inside,
he took the crystal from his pocket and put it on the
dressing-table. It sparkled in the morning sunlight. `We've
done it,' he said exultantly. `Will it really give us power?'
   Inside his head the voice said, `More power than you
have ever dreamed of.'
   Even the icy tones of the Spider seemed tinged with
triumph, then she spoke again, sharply this time. `Veil
your mind, Lupton. Conceal your ambitions. If my sisters
on Metebelis Three could read your desires, they would
kill you.'
   It was Lupton's first indication that the Spiders were
not all united in their aims. Before he could ask more
questions, a strange, high-pitched humming seemed to fill
the room. He staggered and collapsed on the bed.
   `Beware,' said the Spider's voice. `They seek to make the
link. Veil your mind!'
   Lupton felt the room blur and dissolve around him. His
surroundings vanished. Not suddenly, as when the Spicier
had teleported him from the motorboat to the monastery,
but slowly, swimmingly. Yet all the time Lupton was aware
that this was not a real transformation. His body was still
resting on the bed in his room. Only his mind had moved.
It was being drawn through endless voids of space, away,
away...
   Suddenly Lupton seemed to be in ­ a place. Not a room
or a cave, but a vast gloomy hollow, criss-crossed with
cobwebby strands. In sudden terror, he realised that he was
at the heart of a giant web. Ranged in front of him he saw
row upon row of giant spiders. Their thin, clear voices set
up a continuous high-pitched humming, causing the
strands of the web to vibrate. He was in the Council
Chamber of the Spiders, Rulers of Metebelis Three. They
were all grouped in a semi-circle round one particular
Spider, larger and more powerful than all the rest.
Somehow Lupton knew that this was the Spider Queen.
Her voice, when she spoke, crackled with authority. `You
were successful?'
   Lupton heard his Spider, the one inside his head,
answer, `Totally. The crystal is ours.' A hum of approval
went up from the Spider Council.
   The Queen said, `You have done well., Prepare to
return, bringing the crystal with you. It will take time to
build up the power. When we are ready the two-legs must
perform the ritual that concentrates his mind.'
   Lupton sensed that to these creatures he was no more
than a fly caught in their webs. He made an effort and
forced himself to speak. `And what about me? You need me
to make the link, to bring the crystal back. Without me
you wouldn't have recovered your precious crystal at all. I
have been your friend. I must be rewarded!'
   A gasp of horror went up from the Council. `A two-legs
dares to claim friendship with the eight-legs, the Noble
Ones?' said the Queen in horror.
   Lupton would have spoken again but his Spider
intervened. `Forgive him, O Queen,' she said placatingly.
`He means no harm, and he has served us well.'
   Another Spider spoke. `Then his reward shall be to
serve us further. We shall use him in the great work, the
conquest of Earth. That is the secret purpose of the
Council.'
   The Council Chamber began to dissolve around him.
Dimly, he heard the Queen's voice saying, `We have
exhausted our power. Be ready, be ready...'
   Suddenly he was back in his room, on his bed. He sat up
gasping, but the Spider spoke soothingly inside his head.
`Rest now. Let the power return to your body and to your
mind. Rest, Lupton.' Slowly he drifted into sleep, rolling
over, face downwards, his head pillowed in his arms.
   After a moment the giant Spider materialised, sitting on
his back. It hopped from the bed, scuttled towards the door
and vanished...

Some time later a quaint old Edwardian roadster drove up
to the monastery. Two visitors got out, a tall white-haired
man and a young girl. The tall man insisted on seeing Cho-
Je, and when it became apparent that he wasn't going away
until he did, Cho-Je agreed to receive them. They sat in the
hall. Students drifted in and out, others sat quietly reading
or meditating.
   Sarah listened as the Doctor gave Cho-Je a brief account
of the theft of the crystal, and their reasons for visiting
him.
   The little monk waited until the Doctor had finished,
without showing the slightest sign of surprise or disbelief.
`Most interesting, Doctor,' he said blandly, `but I assure
you it is impossible that Mr. Lupton had any connection
with these strange events.' Lupton's friend Barnes, who
had been sitting nearby, slipped quietly out of the room.
Scarcely had he gone when the Spider materialised behind
the door. She crouched, listening.
   `But it was Lupton,' Sarah was protesting. `I saw him. I
recognised him.'
   Cho-Je gave his most infuriating smile. `Doctor, you -
say you... ah... lost sight of Mr. Lupton at about half-past
ten? On a river over a hundred miles from here?'
   The Doctor nodded.
   `At exactly half-past ten, I was on my way to the
Meditation Class. I passed Mr. Lupton as he was going into
his room. We greeted each other. Now, unless he was
transported here in the twinkling of an eye...'
   `Stranger things have happened,' said the Doctor levelly.
   Cho-Je nodded solemnly. `As we know, such things are
child's play to a true Master. But you surely cannot believe
that Mr. Lupton possesses such powers. He is still a
novice.'

Lupton surfaced angrily from a deeply refreshing sleep,
filled with dreams of vast, undefined power. He realised
that Barnes was shaking him, and snarled. `What is it?'
    Barnes' voice was panicky. `That girl ­ she's come back.
There's someone called the Doctor with her. They say you
stole some kind of jewel...' Barnes' eyes widened as he saw
the blue gem sitting incongruously on the dressing-table
next to Lupton's hairbrush. `Then it's true!' he whispered.
   Lupton got to his feet. He felt confident, strong.
Without answering he went to the little wash basin, took
off his jacket, and splashed his face with water.
   He waited until he had towelled himself dry before he
spoke, `Do you know why I came here?' Barnes shook his
head. `Right! Potted history coming up.' There was a
savage bitterness in Lupton's voice.
   He sat on the bed, gazing into the past, `Picture me:
bright young salesman, sales manager, finally sales
director. I gave them twenty-five years of my life. Then the
take-over boys moved in. Golden handshake for poor old
Lupton. So ­ I set up on my own. You know what
happened? The big boys broke me. Very efficiently, too.
I'm still looking for some of the bits.'
   (Sunk in his memories Lupton didn't see Tommy's face
appear at the open window. Tommy saw the jewel
gleaming on the dressing-table. He stretched out an arm,
scooped it up, and disappeared from sight.)
   Barnes said, puzzled, `So you came here to seek peace of
mind?'
   Lupton roared with laughter. `I came here for power! I
want to see them grovelling to me. I want to see them eating
dirt.'
   Barnes looked at him in horror, shaken by the venom in
Lupton's voice. `You mean you want to take over the firm
that ruined you ­ something like that?'
   `More than that, Barnes. I just might take over the
whole stinking world.'
   Looking guiltily over his shoulder, Tommy slipped into
the cupboard under the back stairs. No one ever came here
­ it was his own special hideaway. He switched on the
cupboard light, blinking in the harsh glare from the naked
bulb. Buried under a pile of junk in one corner was an old
cardboard shoe-box ­ Tommy's treasure chest. He took off
the lid to reveal a collection of odds and ends: pieces of
glass, brightly-coloured stones, odds and ends of broken,
worthless jewellery ­ anything that sparkled and shone
enough to appeal to Tommy's magpie instinct. The brooch
that Sarah had given him rested on top of the collection.
Next to it Tommy carefully laid the blue crystal from
Metebelis Three. He put the lid back on the box, returned
it to its hiding place, switched out the light and slipped
back into the corridor, an expression of innocence on his
face.
   Lupton was just putting his jacket back on when he saw
Barnes's face fill with horror. Barnes pointed a shaking
finger. By the door, the Spider crouched looking at them.
Lupton said, `You'd better go, Barnes.' Thankfully, Barnes
slipped out of the room.
   The Spider said, `Lupton, the one called the Doctor is
here. You will go and see him, lull his suspicions.'
   Lupton said, `Don't be ridiculous. He knows me. He
saw me. He's too dangerous to trifle with. I intend to keep
out of his way.'
   Lupton felt a lash of cold rage from the Spider's mind.
She was not used to disobedience. A sudden wave of
psychic pain washed through his brain. His face twisted in
agony. Yet somehow Lupton knew that he could endure
the pain. He could master it. He could even... send... it...
back! Lupton's face twisted with effort and suddenly the
Spider began to thrash convulsively on the floor. `No,
Lupton, no! Stop ­ please!'
   Lupton's face relaxed, and the Spider became still.
Struggling to recover her strength, she said, `You are
strong, Lupton, stronger and cleverer than the two-legs of
Metebelis Three.'
   `I'm cleverer than most of them on Earth,' said Lupton.
`And I've no intention of becoming a slave to you, or that
arrogant Queen of yours.'
   `I like her arrogance no more than you, Lupton. You
seek power on Earth, I on Metebelis. We must help each
other.'
   Lupton smiled. He could feel that she was trying to
recover his good will. `Very well ­ but as an equal
partnership. Remember that!'
   He turned, and the Spider leaped on to his back, and
disappeared. He heard her voice inside his head. `Now ­
the crystal. Soon we must leave.'
   Lupton turned to the dressing-table. The crystal was
gone.

In the hall, Mike Yates and Sarah were listening to the
duel of words between the Doctor and Cho-Je. Each of the
two men was calm, polite and utterly determined. Under
the unassuming exterior of the little monk, the Doctor
could feel an intelligence and will that was a match for his
own.
   `May we see this man, Lupton?' said the Doctor. `I'm
sorry to be so pressing, but it really is extremely urgent!'
   `In the West,' said Cho-Je infuriatingly, `you whip your
poor horse too much. He is exhausted, and yet he never
leaves his stable...'
   The Doctor smiled, acknowledging the truth of Cho-Je's
argument. `That is very true ­ and yet has it not also been
said...' Dropping into sonorous Tibetan, the Doctor
countered with a text from one of the more obscure
Tibetan masters.
   Yates and Sarah gave each other despairing looks.
Tommy slipped into the hall and beckoned to Sarah from
the doorway. Unnoticed by the Doctor and Cho-Je, who
were exchanging Tibetan texts like two small boys
comparing stamp collections, Sarah moved towards the
door. Tommy tugged at her sleeve and said, `Sarah, come
with me. Tommy got present for you.'
   `Well, not now I'm afraid, Tommy.'
   Tommy tightened his grip. `Please ­ you come now.'
   Sarah sighed. She might as well go off with Tommy as
sit here listening to the Doctor and Cho-Je chatting away
in Tibetan. `All right,' she said. She moved to Mike Yates
and indicated that she was going off with Tommy, and
wouldn't be long.
    Mike waved back, and then turned his attention to the
Doctor and Cho-Je.
    They had reverted to English, though for all he could
understand of their conversation they might as well have
gone on talking Tibetan.
    `There is only the Now,' Cho-Je was saying happily.
`The Here and the Now, the present moment with no
duration ­ which is Eternity!'
    `But time is the element we are born into,' countered the
Doctor. `We swim in it like a fish in a bowl of water.'
    Cho-Je chuckled. `Yet how much happier that fish
would be if you tipped the bowl of water into the ocean...'
    `Or better still,' said the Doctor solemnly, `tipped the
ocean into the bowl!'
    The Doctor and Cho-Je laughed uproariously. `I suppose
it'll all mean something to me one day,' thought Mike.
Then to his relief, he saw the Doctor rise to his feet.
Calmly the Doctor said, `And now may we see Mr.
Lupton?'
    Cho-Je smiled. He had taken a mischievous delight in
verbal fencing with the Doctor, but he knew when he was
beaten. `But of course,' he said, as though the issue had
never been in doubt. `Mr. Moss, will you please find Mr.
Lupton for this gentleman?' Moss, a small bearded man,
nodded obediently and set off.
    Lupton was pacing his room. `You must give me time.
I'll find the crystal. Someone's taken it.'
    `There is no time,' said the Spider, her voice filled with
fear. `My sisters are building the power now. I can feel it.
Soon they will be ready to take us back to Metebelis.'
    `And if we refuse to go?'
    `They will use that power to blast us out of existence! I
shall die, and you will lose your mind!'
    Lupton shuddered. `And if we go without the crystal...?
    `If the Queen learns on our arrival that we have lost the
crystal, she will kill us both in her rage.'
   Lupton paused, then he nodded decisively. `We'll bluff
them. We'll pretend we've still got it. We have no choice.'
He went to a cupboard and produced the mandala. With
the silken cloth rolled under his arm, he left his room and
hurried towards the cellar. If he used the back stairs he
could get there without being seen.
   Sarah followed Tommy along the corridors to the door
of his special cupboard. `You wait here,' he said
mysteriously, and disappeared inside. Sarah shrugged and
waited. After a moment, she heard footsteps coming
towards her.
   Reluctant to explain why she was hanging about, Sarah
ducked inside Tommy's cupboard. Tommy, who was
fumbling with a shoe-box, looked up at her suspiciously.
`Someone's coming,' she explained. `Ssh!' Satisfied that she
wasn't spying out his hiding place, Tommy nodded
obediently. Sarah had left the cupboard door a little ajar,
and, with idle curiosity, she peeped out.
   To her surprise, she saw Lupton hurrying along the
corridor, the mandala cloth tucked under his arm. He
looked round, then went through the door to the cellar,
She waited till he was out of sight and turned to Tommy.
`Listen, Tommy, you know Mike Yates in the great hall?'
Tommy nodded.
   `Tell him Lupton's gone into the cellar,' whispered
Sarah urgently. `Say I'm going down there, too.' She
slipped back into the corridor, leaving Tommy clutching
the shoe-box.
   He called after her. `Sarah ­ I got present for you.' But
she was gone. Sadly, Tommy opened his shoe-box and
looked at the blue crystal, gleaming on top of his pile of
treasures. Still, he could always give it to her later. He put
the box back in hiding and stood thinking.
   Now what was it she'd asked him to do? Something to
do with Mr. Yates...
   As Sarah crept down the cellar steps a strange feeling
came over her that all this had happened before. But this
time there was no little group of robed figures: only
Lupton, cross-legged before the mandala, his voice rising
and falling in a strange guttural chant. Just as before, she
could feel the surge of power building up. Lupton's voice
rose and fell, and a strange glow began to appear around
the mandala. She wondered if more spiders would arrive...
   In the hall, Moss was reporting to Cho-Je, `Honestly,
I've looked everywhere. Not in his room, not meditating.
Maybe he's gone for a walk.' Tommy's bulky form loomed
up, dwarfing Moss.
   `Hey, Yates,' he called loudly.
   `Not now, Tommy,' said Yates.
   Tommy was indignant. `You want Lupton ­ he's in
cellar. Sarah too. She followed him!'
   The Doctor was instantly on the alert. `Where is this
cellar, Mike?'
   Yates was already moving. `This way, Doctor. I'll show
you.' The Doctor ran after him.
   In the cellar, Lupton's chanting reached a sudden peak.
He stepped on to the glowing mandala ­ and vanished.
Instinctively Sarah got to her feet and ran down the steps.
There was still a faint glow around the intricate design.
Somehow it seemed to draw her. Slowly, as if hypnotised,
Sarah put first one foot and then the other on to the
mandala.
   She heard a shout from the head of the cellar steps. It
was the Doctor, Yates at his side. The Doctor called, `Sarah
­ step back. Get off that thing!'
   She tried to obey but she couldn't. She felt herself being
drawn away, away...
   As Yates and the Doctor started down the cellar steps to
help her, Sarah Jane Smith flicked out of existence. By the
time they reached the mandala it was empty...
                      6
          Arrival on Metebelis Three
Sarah landed ­ somewhere ­ with a jolt, eyes tight shut. At
first she didn't dare open them, for fear of what she might
see. But she couldn't prevent the impressions of her
surroundings flooding in. It was hot. Dry and hot. Yet at
the same time the air had a sort of richness, a not-
unpleasant spicy tang, as if it contained elements she
wasn't used to. Underfoot, she could feel sand and
pebbles...
    She opened her eyes, and saw yellow sandstone. She was
sheltering under a huge boulder. Other boulders,
fantastically shaped, were dotted about a tawny, desert-like
landscape. A range of blue mountains towered in the
distance. Most astonishing of all, the desert was strewn
with a carpet of many-coloured, shining gem-stones.
Instinctively, Sarah knew where she was. Some-how she
had been swept up in the power of Lupton's ritual. She was
on Metebelis Three.
    A flicker of movement caught her eye. A solitary figure
was plodding across that jewelled plain, towards the
highest mountain. Even at this distance, Sarah could
recognise Lupton. She decided that wherever he was going,
she didn't want to, and turned firmly in the other direction.
Not far away was a patch of green, cultivated fields edging
a sparkling river, and, near that, a settlement of little huts.
`I hope the natives are friendly,' thought Sarah.
    As she left the shelter of her boulder, someone pounced
from behind. A grimy, work-hardened hand clamped down
over her mouth; a sinewy, bare arm locked across her
throat. Some kind of cloak was thrown over her head, and
despite her frantic struggle, she was picked up and carried
off.
    During a hot, bumpy and very uncomfortable journey,
Sarah could only discover that her unseen captor was thin
and wiry ­ but very strong. He quelled with ease her
attempts to struggle, and carried her what seemed a very
long way with no sign of tiredness.
   At last she was dumped down abruptly, on a very hard
surface. The cloak was whipped from her head, and she
blinked in the sudden light. She was in a roughly cobbled
village square, surrounded by one-storey log buildings.
   Around her stood a little group of people in rough
working clothes. They looked like Middle Ages peasants,
with a few exotic touches. An argument was raging over
her head.
   `I tell you she's a spy,' someone was saying. `I found her
hiding in the rocks.' He was a tall, fierce-looking youth ­
obviously the one who had captured her.
   One of the women said angrily, `Then why bring her
here and endanger us all, Tuar? You should have killed her
where you found her.'
   Tuar nodded. `You're right. But it's easily remedied.' He
pulled out a knife and started towards Sarah.
   She screamed, scrambled to her feet, and tried to run ­
but she was hemmed in. `I'm not a spy,' she babbled. `I
don't know who you are or anything about you.'
   `You lie,' said Tuar, reaching out for her again.
   Sarah backed away. `Who am I supposed to be spying
for ­ the spiders?'
   A gasp of horror issued from the little group. `You see,'
said Tuar, `she is a spy. Who but one of the eight-legs'
creatures would dare use the forbidden word?'
   Hands grabbed Sarah and held her helpless, as Tuar
approached with his knife. A voice said `Stop!' A tall
handsome man in his thirties had come out of one of the
houses, and was striding towards them. Sarah could see by
the way people fell back before him that he was some kind
of leader. `Don't harm her, Tuar,' he ordered. `I think she's
telling the truth. Look at her clothes ­ she's a stranger. A
spy would try to pass for one of us, or someone from the
next village. She doesn't even look as if she came from this
planet.'
    `I don't!' said Sarah eagerly. `I come here from Earth.'
    The man looked at her keenly. `How? In a starship like
our ancestors?' A sudden hope showed in his face. `Do you
bring help from Earth against our oppressors?'
    `I wish I did,' said Sarah. `I came here alone ­ and I'm
not even sure how I got here.'
    Tuar, who seemed to be a young man of very fixed
views, said, `I tell you, brother, she's a spy! She will betray
us all.'
    A long, high trumpet note rang through the square. The
effect on the little crowd was extraordinary. Everyone
broke and ran for the shelter of the huts. From having
been the centre of attention, Sarah suddenly found herself
totally ignored. Only the tall man had not run with the
others. He looked at her consideringly for a moment and
said, `You'd better come with me. We'll talk later.' He took
Sarah by the wrist and pulled her across the square and
into one of the huts, shutting the door behind them.
    There were a number of people already crowded into the
little hut, including Tuar, and an older man and woman,
both with lined, toil-worn faces. Sarah's rescuer waved his
hand around the hut. `Welcome,' he said. `This is my
brother, Tuar, whom you have already met. These are my
parents, Sabor and Neska.'
    It seemed odd to be exchanging introductions with
people who, seconds ago, had been planning to kill her, but
Sarah did her best. `How do you do,' she said politely. `My
name is Sarah.' Tuar just glared at her. The old people
looked at her with frightened faces. The trumpet sounded
again, very near this time. Everyone crowded to the
window. Sarah joined them, trying to see what was going
on.
    Four men marched into the square. Two carried a richly
decorated conveyance rather like a small sedan chair. On
the chair rested a cushion, and on the cushion sat a giant
spider, far larger than the one Sarah had seen at the
monastery. Although Sarah didn't know it, this was the
Queen Spider, who had talked with Lupton not long ago.
   The men carrying the chair set it down. Then, with
their two fellows, they formed a guard, one at each corner.
They wore simple peasant-type clothes like the villagers,
but their steel and leather trappings showed they were
soldiers. All four carried short, jewelled staves. One of
them, evidently their Captain, raised his jewelled staff and
spoke in a kind of formal chant. `Hear now! Huath, Queen
of the eight-legs, most noble of the Noble Ones, speaks
thus: Arak, male two-leg, having most wickedly attacked
Field-Guard Draga, leaving him for dead, the same Arak
will now surrender himself.'
   Sarah listened to this rigmarole with astonishment.
Then she realised with a shock that Arak, the man being
called upon to surrender himself, was her rescuer.
   Arak gave a sigh of resignation, and started to leave the
hut. The old woman clung to him, and Tuar, his brother,
barred his way. `Don't go, brother. They'll kill you.'
   Arak looked at him grimly. `Listen to the rest of it.'
   The hoarse voice of the guard carried clearly through
the open window. `If Arak does not surrender, one male
two-leg will be taken from each family of the settlement to
suffer the retribution due as a result of the foul crime of
Arak.'
   Gently, Arak disengaged Neska's arm. `I must go,
Mother, or we shall all suffer.'
   Sabor, the old man, said quickly, `Let me speak with the
Queen. She may listen to me.'
   `No,' snapped Arak. `Why should you run the risk?'
   `Because our people need you, my son,' said the old man
gently. `They trust you and listen to you. You are our only
hope.' Before anyone could stop him, the old man had
slipped out of the door.
   Through the window Sarah saw him run to the Spider's
chair and kneel before it.
   `I beg leave to speak to the Queen,' he called. `Speak
then, Sabor,' said the Queen. She spoke in the clear, cold
voice of all the Spiders.
   Sabor began to plead for his son, saying that Draga was
a cruel guard who oppressed the villagers. The cold voice
of the Queen cut through his words.
   `He struck my guard, did he not? Then he must die.
Where is he?'
   Sabor stood up boldly. `He has escaped to the hills. I
Helped him.'
   `Then you will take his place,' said the Queen. `Justice is
satisfied. Let us return!'
   The bearers lifted the chair, and the little procession
moved off. Sabor walked between the two remaining
guards, his head held high. Neska, his wife, broke free of
her son's restraining hold and ran after him, sobbing and
screaming. One of the guards touched her arm with his
jewelled staff, and she collapsed, writhing in pain. People
were appearing at the doors of the huts by now, but no one
dared move to help her.
   Sarah felt a sudden surge of blazing anger against the
callousness of the Spider Queen. She glared angrily after
the departing chair. Suddenly, the Queen's voice rang out
again. `Stop! I sense the presence of a stranger here. One
who has the audacity not to fear me! Guards, search the
village.'
   Sarah turned to Arak. `They mustn't find you here.' She
turned and walked slowly out of the hut...

After a hair-raisingly fast drive from the monastery in
Bessie, the Doctor rushed into his laboratory, unlocked the
TARDIS and disappeared inside. As his fingers flicked
over the controls of the central console, he reflected grimly
that, erratic as the TARDIS sometimes was, Metebelis
Three was the one place he could be sure of reaching. Long
ago, on his first trip in search of the blue crystal, he'd
wired the co-ordinates into the programmer, and they'd
never been removed. There was still the question of time,
but he could safely leave that to the TARDIS ­ she had an
instinct in these matters.
   The Brigadier, hurrying into the laboratory to ask the
Doctor how he'd got on, realised that he was too late. The
familiar groaning noise filled the air and the old blue
police box shimmered and disappeared...
   For a direct linked journey like this in the TARDIS;
departure and arrival were almost simultaneous. In no time
at all, the Doctor was unlocking the TARDIS door and
stepping out on to the soil of an alien planet.
   He locked the TARDIS behind him, and then looked
round, with a sudden feeling that he was not alone.
   And indeed he was not. The TARDIS had landed in a
sort of village square. The villagers were standing in the
doorways of their huts, looking at him in awe. Directly in
front of him stood a kind of sedan chair, on which sat a
very large spider. And to complete the picture, Sarah was
being held prisoner between two menacing guards. Sarah
looked towards him in astonishment. `Oh, Doctor,' she
said, `of all the times to arrive!'
                        7
             Prisoner of the Spiders
The Doctor gave Sarah an encouraging smile, and said
cheerfully, `Hullo, Sarah Jane!' He walked straight towards
the sedan chair on which sat the Spider. One of the guards
touched him on the arm with his jewelled staff. The
Doctor felt a sudden sharp pang, like a moderate electric
shock. He jumped back, and said reprovingly, `Do be
careful, old chap. That hurts!'
   The guard was taken aback. `Kneel to the most noble
Queen,' he growled.
   `By all means,' said the Doctor obligingly. He made a
courtly bow, in an elaborate style he'd learned at the court
of good Queen Bess, and fell on one knee. `Greetings, O
Queen. May I ask what you're going to do with this young
lady? You see, she's a friend of mine, and...'
   The Queen interrupted him, `Where do you come
from?'
   `Both Sarah and I come from Earth.'
   `Bring him too,' ordered the Queen Spider. `He must be
questioned.'
   One of the guards tried to shove the Doctor towards
Sarah and Sabor. When the Doctor didn't move, the guard
jabbed him with the staff. This time the pain was sharper
and the Doctor didn't care for it at all. `I did ask you not to
do that,' he said mildly, then picked the guard up and
threw him across the square. The astonished man
cartwheeled away in a whirl of arms and legs, and landed
against one of the huts with a thump. Two more guards
made for the Doctor, and he threw them after the first one,
who was just getting up. All three went down again.
   Suddenly Sarah yelled, `Doctor, look out!' The Doctor
whirled round to sec the guard Captain raise his staff in a
pointing gesture. The Doctor dodged, and the blast of
energy whizzed past him. By now the guards were on him
again and there followed a short, confused struggle, which
the Doctor enjoyed enormously. So, too, did the people of
the village, who crowded to their doorsteps to enjoy the
spectacle of the Spider Queen's guards being knocked
about like skittles! When it was over, only the Doctor was
still on his feet.
    He was reaching out a hand to Sarah, when again she
screamed, `Doctor!' But this time the warning came too
late. The Queen Spider was quivering with rage on her
cushion. A crackling finger of flame lanced from her body
and caught the Doctor squarely in the back. The force of it
blasted him clean across the square and on to the TARDIS.
He crashed against its door then slid down it, apparently
dead. The Queen's voice rang out across the square: `So
perish all who dare to question our power.'
    The villagers muttered angrily at the defeat of their
champion. They began to press closer round the sedan, and
the guards had a hard time holding them back. In the
jostling of the crowd Sarah was pushed away from her
guard, whose attention was taken up with the angry
villagers. She felt a hand tugging at her own. A rough
shawl was thrown over her head. Sarah drew it down to
cover her head and shoulders. A crowd of village women
pressed round her.
    The guard Captain looked at the unruly mob. He
whispered to the Queen, `It would be wise to leave now.'
    One of the struggling guards called, `The girl ­ she's
gone.'
    The Captain looked round, but Sarah was lost in the
milling crowd of beshawled village women.
    `You will be punished,' said the Queen. `But we cannot
wait. Soon it will be dark. Bring the male!' Two guards
picked up the chair; two others hustled Sabor away
between them. The little procession left the square, and
headed across the plain of jewels to the blue mountain..
    As soon as they were out of sight, Sarah ran to the
crumpled figure of the Doctor. He was white and still, no
sign of life or movement about him.
   Arak came to her side and tried to lead her away. `It's no
good. He's dead. They can use their powers to give pain or
to stun, but the full blast kills. Your friend is dead.'
   Sarah was on her knees beside the Doctor trying to find
some kind of pulse. `He isn't dead. He can't be.'
   Tuar joined them. `If we stay out here, we shall all be
dead. It's almost curfew time.'
   Sarah saw the rest of the villagers hurrying into their
huts. She noticed for the first time that it was growing
dark. `Tuar's right,' said Arak gently. `Leave him there.
We'll bury him tomorrow.'
   The two men began to pull her away from the Doctor by
main force. At first Sarah was too desolate to resist them,
then she began to struggle wildly. She tore herself free
from their grip. `Look! He moved. He moved his arm!' She
ran back to the Doctor, the two men following. Suddenly
the Doctor stirred and groaned. `She's right,' said Arak
incredulously. `He is alive. Come on, give me a hand.'
Lifting the Doctor between them, Arak and Tuar dragged
him into their hut, Sarah following anxiously behind.
   They stretched the Doctor out on a rough wooden bunk.
A young woman, the one who had given Sarah the shawl,
came into the hut. Arak nodded towards her. `This is Rega,
my sister. How is Mother?'
   `Sleeping. She moans and calls Sabor's name.'
   The Doctor, too, was moaning and twisting on his bed.
The woman looked down at him.
   Sarah said worriedly. `He seems to be getting worse.'
The woman nodded. `He's dying, my child. No one can
survive the anger of the eight-legs.'
   The slow tolling of a bell resounded through the village,
`What's that?' asked Sarah.
   Tuar looked out of the window. `Curfew! It's death to be
out after twilight. The patrols kill on sight.'
   The Doctor groaned again. `Is there nothing you can
do?' pleaded Sarah.
   Rega looked at her with the calmness of one well used to
death and suffering. `Nothing. By rights he should be dead
already.'

Another visitor to Metebelis Three was in somewhat better
condition. Lupton, following the instructions of his
Spider, had plodded across the jewelled plain until he
reached the base of the blue mountain. He had come to a
little group of scattered huts which encircled a pool. There,
guards had appeared and handled him roughly until his
Spider had materialised and frightened them into instant
submission. The Spider scuttled away into the mountain.
The guards treated Lupton with reverence, taking him into
one of the little huts and giving him refreshment. Lupton
had drunk fiery blue wine, and eaten chunks of roasted
mutton, rough, whole-ground bread, and strange exotic
fruits. Then they had led him through the network of caves
into the heart of the mountain. The tunnels were lit by
flickering torches, and blue jewels glinted in their walls. At
last he stood in the shadowy place that he had visited once
before in his mind: the Council Chamber of the Spiders.

Lupton's Spider was playing for time, giving a long
account of her adventures on Earth. Lupton listened
keenly, well aware that his own fate depended on her
winning the Council's trust. But the Queen, freshly
returned from her experiences in the village, was in an evil
mood. She threatened the Spider with the anger of the
`Great One', who seemed to be some kind of supreme ruler,
and even more powerful than the Queen. Lupton gathered
that she lived a solitary existence somewhere in the depths
of the blue mountains, although her influence was felt
everywhere. `You waste our time,' said the Queen finally.
`Where is the crystal?'
   Paralysed with fear, the Spider made no answer. Lupton
decided to intervene. He knew that if his Spider revealed
that they had lost the crystal, they would both be killed
instantly. If they were going to bluff, they might as well be
bold about it. `We have the crystal, O Queen,' said Lupton,
with a confidence he was far from feeling.
    `Then where is it? The Council waits for it. So too does
the Great One!'
    `Then the Council will continue to wait ­ until we have
received the rewards of our success!'
    A murmur of horror ran through the Council. `Such
insolence, from a mere two-legs,' they muttered.
    `Guards, seize him,' snapped the Queen. The guards
lining the edge of the Chamber rushed forward.
    `You dare not harm us,' said Lupton. `Remember we
have the crystal.'
    `Stop,' called the Queen. The guards fell back. The
Queen's mind raced furiously. She would not be humiliated
in her own Council Chamber. Suddenly she remembered
the events at the village and her agile mind saw how to
turn them to her advantage.
    `It appears that you do not realise the extent of your
failure. You were followed here by two Earth spies. The
male I killed. The other, a girl, still lives. I suggest, sisters,
that we refuse to listen to these traitors, until she is
captured. Then it will be time to discuss rewards.'
    A fierce hum of assent went up from the Council. The
guards began once more to close in on Lupton. He decided
to try a final piece of boldness.
    `Then permit me to help you, O Queen. I know the girl
you speak of. I met her on Earth.' He gestured to the
guards around him. `Give me the assistance of these
gentlemen, and I'll capture her for you myself.'

Sarah crouched over the sleeping Doctor, alert for every
flicker of his eyelids. From time to time, she sponged his
brow with fresh water from a stone jug. Behind her, Arak
and his brother were arguing fiercely. Sarah was dimly
aware that the younger and more hot-headed Tuar was
urging open revolt, while Arak insisted that this would be
mere suicide. They must wait for some better opportunity
­ though what opportunity he could not say. They needed
help.
    `No one can help us,' said Tuar fiercely. `We must save
ourselves.'
    Sarah looked up. `The Doctor could help you, if he was
well again. I'm sure he could.'
    As if in response to his name, the Doctor stirred.
`Sarah,' he muttered, `Sarah?'
    She leaned closer to him. `I'm here, Doctor.' His eyes
flickered open and fixed on hers. He seemed to be
struggling to tell her something of immense importance.
`Machine!' he said indistinctly. `Need machine ­ cure me.'
    `What machine, Doctor? Tell me where it is.'
    `Machine in TARDIS ­ in old leather bag... left hand
locker...' The Doctor's voice tailed away, and his head fell
back. Sarah found the TARDIS key on its thong round his
neck and gently lifted it over his head.
    `Machine?' said Arak. `Why does he want a machine?'
    Sarah was on her feet. `I don't know, but if he needs it,
I'm going to get it.' She headed for the door but Arak
stopped her.
    `You can't go out. They'll catch and kill you.'
    `I'll have to risk that.' She slipped past him, out of the
hut.
    The cobbled square was still and silent in the blue
moonlight. Sarah slipped off her shoes, leaving them at the
hut door. Her bare feet made no sound on the cobbles. The
TARDIS sat incongruously in the middle of the square.
Sarah reached it in one quick, silent dash. She opened the
door and slipped inside.
    Hurriedly she went to the Doctor's locker. It was his
odds-and-ends locker, and held the most amazing
assortment of junk from every planet and time. At last she
found what she was looking for: a beautifully decorated
leather bag, with a machine inside. Sarah took a quick look
at it. It was a complicated arrangement of coiled metal,
with something that looked like a hand-grip. Sarah shut
the bag and left the TARDIS. The heavy bag was
cumbersome, and she dropped it at her feet while she
locked the TARDIS door.
   She was about to sprint back to the hut, when someone
stepped from behind the TARDIS and barred her way. It
was Lupton. He sneered in the manner that she
remembered from their first meeting in the monastery.
`You are keen to get a story, aren't you, Miss Smith? What
a pity it'll never be published.'
   Sarah dodged round him, and ran across the square. A
guard stepped out from the shadows. She turned. More
guards were coming towards her. Sarah dodged and weaved
away from them. She knew there was no chance of escape.
Her one aim was to lead the guards as far away from the
TARDIS, and Arak's cottage, as she possibly could.
   She had reached the far end of the village when they
finally caught her. She collapsed, gasping from lack of
breath, and they soon had her held fast. Lupton came up,
smiling with satisfaction. He snapped his fingers, and the
guards dragged Sarah away. The leather bag, with the
Doctor's machine inside, lay forgotten in a pool of shadow
at the foot of the TARDIS. Forgotten, that is, by Lupton,
and the guards, who had scarcely ever been aware of it. But
not forgotten by Arak, who had watched the whole scene
from the doorway of his hut. `She led them away from us,'
he said softly. `And the bag is still there ­ at the foot of the
stranger's machine.' He glanced at the Doctor who lay
deathly still on his bunk. `The girl said this man could
help us. I'm going to get the machine.' Before anyone
could protest, Arak slipped out into the darkness of the
square.
   He was taking a calculated risk. The patrol that had
captured Sarah would be busy taking her to the Spiders.
The next patrol wasn't due for ten minutes or more.
   Like Sarah before him, Arack sprinted across the square
on bare, silent feet, and dropped panting into the shadows
at the foot of the TARDIS. The bag was still there. He
picked it up, amazed at the weight, paused to recover his
breath and prepared to set off back to his hut. Then he
heard the ringing of booted feet on the cobble-stones. The
second patrol had come early!
   He could see them approach as he peered round the
edge of the TARDIS: big, cruel-looking men, carrying
blazing torches to search out anyone hiding in the
shadows, armed with the jewelled staffs that all the
Spiders' servants carried ­ weapons that could paralyse or
kill. Arak knew they would patrol the whole square. They
would see him if he waited; they would see him if he
moved.
   Arak's bare toe stubbed against one of the cobbles. It
was loose! Scrabbling desperately, he worked it free. He
crouched, hefting it in his hand, a round stone about the
size of an apple... Arak hurled the stone high across the
roof of a nearby house. It landed in the alley behind, with a
clatter that might have been made by an escaping fugitive.
Instantly the patrol was alerted. Raising their torches they
ran down the alleyway in pursuit. The bag under his arm,
Arak dashed back to his hut. Tuar was holding the door
open. Arak shot inside, and Tuar closed the door silently
behind him.
   Arak took the odd-looking machine from the bag. `Well,
there it is. Though what we're supposed to do with it...'
   `Maybe he'll know,' said Tuar, jerking his head towards
the Doctor.
   They laid the machine on the Doctor's chest. He reacted
quickly, gripping it convulsively. At once the machine
seemed to come to life. It started emitting a low powerful
hum. Lights glowed and flashed somewhere inside it.
Arak, Tuar and Rega looked on in amazement. Suddenly a
powerful spark raced out of the Doctor's body, through the
machine, and into the ground. It was as though the evil
energy was being drained from the Doctor's body. He
stiffened, then relaxed limply. He opened his eyes
suddenly and said distinctly, `Thank you. Thank you very
much.' He closed them, and went peace-fully to sleep.

                         *****

The guards marched Sarah deeper and deeper into the
complex of caverns that was the home of the Spiders. They
led her down a long gloomy tunnel, and then into a small,
round chamber. Strands of cobwebby stuff festooned the
walls and ceilings. A long cocoon of the same stuff hung
from one wall. To her horror, Sarah saw projecting from
one end the head of the old man Sabor, Arak's father.
   Holding her firmly, the guards stripped some of the
white sticky stuff from the walls and began to wrap it
round her. Panic-stricken, she started to struggle ­ but it
was too late. The sticky web held her fast. She could barely
move. They cocooned her from neck to feet, leaving her,
like Sabor, with only her head projecting. Then they
carried her across the chamber and propped her up beside
him. The cocoon stuck fast to the walls. She was helpless.
   Lupton had been looking, a familiar sneer on his face.
When the process was complete, he said, `Do you know
where you are, Miss Smith?'
   `Why should I?' snapped Sarah defiantly. `I assume it's
some kind of a prison?'
   `How little you know of the habits of our eight-legged
friends, Miss Smith,' said Lupton with evident relish.
`You're not in a prison. You're in the larder.'
                      8
             The Doctor Hits Back
Dawn was approaching on Metebelis Three. The planet's
huge, bright sun, far closer to Metebelis than our sun is to
Earth, was rising rapidly. The gem-stones of the desert
reflected its rays in a hundred different colours. In the
village, the humans stirred uneasily, knowing that it would
soon be time to go and toil in the fields for their Spider
rulers.
   In Arak's hut threee men still slept: the Doctor on the
bunk, Arak and Tuar sprawled on the floor. The Doctor
woke first. A ray of sunshine came through the window
and touched his face. He snapped instantly awake, like a
human alarm clock. He felt rested, and fighting fit. He
looked at his two sleeping companions and his eyes began
to twinkle mischievously. He flung back the rough
curtains, and sunlight flooded into the little hut. The two
brothers stirred and muttered. The Doctor said loudly,
`Wakey, wakey, rise and shine, show a leg the morning's
fine!' Arak and Tuar blinked, and muttered. They turned
their heads towards the Doctor in astonishment,
wondering how a man who had been good as dead the
night before could wake up so appallingly cheerful! The
Doctor looked at them hopefully. `How about a spot of
breakfast?'
   Soon the Doctor was tucking into a plate of thick broth,
brought to him by Rega. Cold water and hard bread made
up the rest of the meal, but the Doctor ate with the greatest
enjoyment. `Excellent broth, this,' he said. `What is it?'
   Tuar grunted, `Mutton...' He went on eating.
   `You have sheep on Metebelis?' said the Doctor chattily.
He held out his bowl for more broth. Rega poured it from a
stone jug.
   Arak said patiently, `Our ancestors brought them from
Earth.'
   `Colonists?',
   Arak nodded. `Four hundred and thirty-three years ago,
a starship came out of its time jump with no power left and
crashed on Metebelis Three.' He spoke in a sort of formal
chant.
   The Doctor looked at him curiously. `You seem to know
the story very well.'
   `My father taught it to me ­ and his to him.'
   `A detailed oral tradition. Fascinating! And what about
the spiders?'
   Arak was surprised. `I thought you knew ­ they came
from Earth too. We think there must have been a colony of
them somewhere on the ship. When it crashed, they were
blown free. The wind carried them to the blue mountain.'
   `Yes of course,' said the Doctor. It was all falling into
place now.
   `The Earth Spiders went to live in the blue mountains,'
said Arak. `The crystals enlarged the spiders' bodies and
minds.'
   Tuar took up the story. `Over the years the eight-legs
grew larger and larger, cleverer and cleverer. Their minds
acquired the power to control humans ­ to blast us down
with pure thought. Eventually they took over.'
   `How did they manage to do that ­ and how do they stay
in charge?'
   `With the help of traitors,' said Arak bitterly. `When
they saw how things were going, some humans joined the
eight-legs. Now they help to enslave the rest of us. They
don't work in the fields. They get the pick of the crops,
while we nearly starve. The Spiders even share a few of
their powers with them ­ just to keep the rest of us in line.'
   `Like those jewelled staves,' said the Doctor. `They must
act as telepathic amplifiers.' Though the technique could
work without them, he thought. Lupton hadn't needed one
­ or the Queen Spider.
   Tuar suddenly exploded. `I don't understand you,' he
shouted. `Our father is a prisoner of the eight-legs! So is
that girl, your friend. Yet you sit there supping broth, and
discussing ancient history. The girl said you would help
us!'
   `And so I will,' said the Doctor. `But first I had to know
exactly what I was up against.' He went over to the back
window and looked out. Behind the hut, the jewelled
desert stretched away to the distant blue mountains. `I
want you to bring me some gems,' he said suddenly. `Like
those lying out there on the plain. As many as you can, all
different shapes, sizes and colours.'
   `Those gems are useless,' protested Tuar. `They're
everywhere. We even have to clear them from our fields
when we plough. There's a pile of them behind the village.'
   Arak nodded. `The blue crystals of power are found only
on the mountains. They're scarce now ­ the eight-legs hunt
for them constantly.'
   `There's more than one kind of crystal on Metebelis,'
said the Doctor, `and more than one kind of power. You
get me those stones, and I'll get you a weapon against the
Spiders.'
   Tuar looked at his brother. Arak shrugged. `We have
nothing to lose. Take a sack and go to the stone pile.'
   Sulkily Tuar obeyed.
   Ten minutes later the floor of the little hut was covered
with stones. The Doctor sat in the middle of them, his
machine in his lap. The machine was switched on again,
and humming quietly. The Doctor picked up a stone and
held it to the machine. There was a low electronic buzz,
and he tossed the stone to one side. He tested another, and
another, still with the same result. Arak and Tuar looked
on, the latter with mounting impatience, as the Doctor
worked patiently. Finally Tuar could restrain himself no
longer. `My father and your friend are in peril and you play
these childish games... `
   The Doctor held up a hand to silence him. `Sssh! I
think I've got it!' The last stone he had tested had
produced an altogether different reaction from the
machine ­ a high, clearer buzz. He tested the stone again.
`Excellent!' said the Doctor. `Now we can get a move on.'
He put the machine on the bed and said, `Both of you, help
me sort through these stones. All we're interested in are
stones exactly like this.' The Doctor held out his hand. On
his palm lay an undistinguished-looking piece of brown
quartz, flecked with green. Tuar looked as if he would
explode again, but Arak forestalled him.
   `It would help if you told us why, Doctor,' he said.
   The Doctor looked at him in mild astonishment. `Oh,
didn't I explain?' Even as he spoke, the Doctor was sifting
though the pile of coloured gem-stones for more pieces of
quartz. `The blue crystals magnify the power of the mind.
Now, since most things have their opposites, I was looking
for a stone which deadened it. Something to soak up the
energy of the Spiders' mental attacks. Luckily for all of us,
I think I've found one. So if you'd kindly give me some
help...'
   Hurriedly, Arak and Tuar joined in the hunt. As usual,
the Doctor had taken charge.
   By the time the morning was well advanced, an amazing
amount had been done. The quartz was extremely
common, and hundreds of the little brown stones had been
found.
   Runners from Arak's resistance organisation were
carrying specimen stones, and the Doctor's instructions, to
all the other villages. Meanwhile, Rega and the other
village women, following more instructions from the
Doctor, were making simple rag headbands, each with one
of the little brown stones sewn into the front. Rega brought
the first batch to the Doctor for his approval. `Is this what
you wanted?'
   The Doctor picked up the strip of linen with its little
stone. `Excellent. Come here, Arak, old chap.' The Doctor
stood behind Arak and tied the band round his head. He
adjusted it carefully, so that the stone rested exactly in the
centre of Arak's forehead. `There we are ­ splendid!'
   Arak raised his hand and touched the headband
dubiously. `This will protect me from the eight-legs ­ and
from the jewelled staves of their guards?'
   The Doctor nodded.
   Tuar rushed into the hut, and looked curiously at his
brother's new headdress. `There's a patrol heading for the
village,' he gasped.
   Arak turned to the Doctor. `A chance to test your
"protection", Doctor. If it doesn't work, they'll wipe this
village out.'
   The squad of guards, jewelled staves in their hands,
swung confidently into the village, as they had done many
times before. They halted with a crash of booted feet in the
centre of the square. The Captain gazed around him. The
men of the village were gathering in front of their huts.
`Why do you not work in the fields?' he shouted. `Go at
once! You will all be punished.' There was no reply. A tall
man detached himself from the gathering crowd and
walked steadily towards the guards. He wore a strange sort
of headband. The Captain saw that the other men were
wearing them too. He looked again at the tall man, and his
eyes widened. `It is the traitor, Arak!' he shouted. `He is to
be killed on sight!'
   The tall man came steadily on. The Captain raised his
jewelled staff, summoned the power of his mind, and
channelled a blast of energy through the staff and on to the
approaching rebel. He waited to see the man collapse in
agony. Nothing happened. Arak still came marching
towards him. The stern, cold face under the incongruous
headband was the last thing the Captain saw. Arak's big
hands reached for his throat, and everything went black...
   The rest of the guards panicked and turned to run. But
there were men everywhere, men with strips of cloth
bound round their heads. It was all over in a matter of
minutes. Arak stood at the doorway of his hut and called
out, `Hide the bodies. We must keep everything looking
normal as long as possible. If they send others, deal with
them in the same way. Not a guard must get back to warn
the eight-legs!' He turned to the Doctor who stood beside
him ready to depart. `I'm sorry, Doctor. It's necessary.'
    The Doctor nodded sadly. He knew there was no gentle
way of breaking the grip of the terror that had held
Metebelis for so long. But, as always, the taking of life
saddened and sickened him. `I must go now, Arak,' he said.
`Follow me as soon as you can.'
    `Doctor ­ you have no stone to protect you.'
    The Doctor tapped the leather bag on his shoulder.
`Don't worry. I have something better.' The two men
clasped hands, and the Doctor left the village and set off
across the jewelled desert to the blue mountain.
    He was going to confront the Spiders in their web.
    Evening was approaching by the time he arrived at the
end of his long and lonely journey. He saw the guard
settlement in the foothills that Lupton had found, and
avoided it. Arak had told him there were other, less well-
guarded entrances to the mountain ­ and he was right.
After an hour's scrambling about the foothills, he found a
narrow cave which was partially concealed by a boulder. It
was the entrance to a tunnel that stretched deep down into
the mountain. Cautiously, the Doctor began to move along
it.

In the heart of the mountain itself, Sarah twisted restlessly
in her cocoon. She had long lost count of the time she had
spent in the Spiders' larder, but it seemed ages and ages!
`Maybe they're well stocked up,' she thought hopefully.
Every now and again she had a burst of frantic struggling,
but her sticky clinging bonds were immovable. Old Sabor
looked on sadly. `It is no use, my child. Even your young
muscles are not strong enough. Try to rest.'
   `Rest? How can you be so calm?'
   `One is only frightened when there is still hope. We
nave none.'
   Not the most inspiring of companions, thought Sarah to
herself. After a moment she said, `Was Lupton ­ the other
man from Earth ­ telling the truth? Will they really ­ eat
us?'
   Sabor nodded. `Usually they eat the sheep we breed for
them. Otherwise they would be devouring their own
servants. But they prefer human flesh ­ when they have an
excuse.'
   Sarah shuddered. She renewed her struggles. `We've got
to get away.'
   Sabor hung passively in his cocoon.
   `I tell you there is no hope.'
   `There's always hope,' said Sarah fiercely. `Maybe the
Doctor will come and rescue us.'
   `Accept it, my child,' said Sabor. `We are already dead.'

The Doctor followed the tunnel even deeper into the
mountain. It was partially blocked with rubble that he had
to climb over, and around. He guessed that it was more or
less disused. Then the tunnel ran into another one, broader
and lit with flaring torches. The Doctor could see blue
crystals, which were inset in the walls. He had reached the
heart of the mountain, where the Spiders lived ­ and their
guards. From now on his journey would be ever more
dangerous, but he had to go on. The Doctor took the
machine from its leather bag and prepared it for use. He
moved out cautiously into the main tunnel.
   For a while his luck held. But as he turned a corner, he
ran straight into a guard. Automatically, the guard raised
his jewelled staff ­ and the Doctor raised his machine. It
was a considerably more sophisticated piece of work than
the improvised headbands, and its effects went one stage
further. Not only did it absorb the effect of the mental
energy-blast and render it harmless ­ it stored the power
and flung it back upon the attacker. Struck down by the
force of his own attack, the guard screamed and crumpled
to the floor. Unfortunately for the Doctor, there were other
guards near by, and the sound of their companion's scream
brought them running. The Doctor raised his machine to
repel their attack, but yet another guard jumped him from
behind, knocking the machine from his hands.
   The Doctor disposed of this new opponent with a swift
throw, but by now the guards were upon him. The
machine had been knocked a few feet along the tunnel. If
he could get to it before they reached him... He made a
desperate leap forward, his body parallel with the ground.
   The machine was inches from his fingers, when a foot
stamped down upon his wrist. The foot was wearing an old
and scruffy brown shoe. The Doctor looked up. Standing
over him was Lupton.
   The Doctor wrenched his wrist free. But before he could
take the machine, Lupton's other foot booted it out of
reach. The Doctor got up slowly. Surrounding him were at
least six guards. Each one held a jewelled staff; each staff
was pointing at the Doctor.
   Lupton stepped back, licking his lips. `Well, what are
you waiting for? Kill him!'
                       9
         In the Lair of the Great One
The Doctor braced himself. He knew even his
extraordinary physique would be unable to survive the
crystal-magnified impact of six hate-filled minds.
   Another guard, a Captain, came running up, `Stop!' The
guards lowered their staves.
   Lupton was furious. `Obey my orders. Kill him.'
   `I come from the Queen,' said the Captain. `Arrest him
and take him to the Council.' He pointed at Lupton.
Protesting furiously, Lupton was bundled away by two of
the guards.
   The Doctor shook his head sadly. `Poor fellow. Hope
they won't be to hard on him. Got into bad company, you
know.' With a friendly nod, the Doctor started to stroll
away.
   For a moment, the Captain was so astonished at his
audacity that he almost let the Doctor go. Then he made a
sign to the remaining guards, who leaped on the Doctor
and pinioned him. `Your execution has merely been
postponed,' said the Captain sourly. `Take him away!'
   Sarah's face filled with joy as the Doctor appeared in the
doorway. Then it fell, as she saw the guards behind him
`Oh, Doctor, not again!'
   Lupton and his Spider, meanwhile, were standing
before the Council.
   `Your conspiracy has been discovered,' the Spider
Queen said gleefully. `You will both die.'
   `They know that we did not bring the crystal back to
Metebelis,' whispered Lupton's Spider.
   Lupton looked coolly at the Queen. `How did you find
out?'
   `In the same way that we first traced it. We linked our
minds in an attempt to discover where you had hidden it.
We felt its vibrations through Time and Space. They were
faint, distant. The crystal is still on Earth,'
   `Do you know where?'
   Reluctantly the Spider Queen said, `We cannot pin-
point the location. We fear the crystal is under the
protection of a mind that we cannot reach.'
   `Then the position hasn't changed at all,' said Lupton
triumphantly. `If you plan to invade Earth, you still need
my help.'
   The Queen almost hissed with rage. `Be careful, two-
legs! You will go too far.'
   Sensing the change of feeling in the Council, Lupton's
Spider added her efforts to his. `What he says is true, O
Queen. Once more your arrogance has endangered the
master plan of the Council ­ the invasion of Earth.'
   The Queen was silent. Pressing her advantage, the
Spider went on. `This is not the first mistake the Queen
has made. Maybe she is growing old. Maybe it is time for a
Coronation.'
   Since the main feature of a Spider Coronation is the
ceremonial eating of the old Queen by her successor, the
Spider Queen reacted violently to this suggestion. She
sought desperately for some move that would restore her
power.
   Suddenly she produced her trump card. `I am not sure
as to the wisdom of this invasion plan. I shall visit the Cave
of the Crystal and consult the Great One. Her orders were
to recover the crystal ­ nothing more.'
   A ritual chant went up from the Council. `All praise to
the Great One!'
   Her sisters eyed the Queen with new respect. It was true
that the Great One had not been formally consulted about
the projected invasion of Earth ­ and she had grown
unpredictable of late. If any of her servants displeased her,
even in thought, a colossal blast of mental energy sent
them shrieking into nothingness. And the Great One was
easily displeased. Few dared to visit her, or even to
mention her name, lest that vast, scheming mind should
turn upon them. Even to approach her too closely meant
death.
   `Do you hear me, sisters?' shrieked the Queen
triumphantly. `I shall, this very day, speak with the Great
One herself! She will decide.'
   Helplessly cocooned, like Sabor and Sarah, the Doctor
flexed his muscles experimentally. `Fascinating experience
this,' he said cheerfully. `I've often wondered what a fly
feels like.'
   `Well now you know,' said Sarah. `You realise we're
probably on tomorrow's menu?'
   `Well, they'll find me a tough old bird,' said the Doctor
determinedly. `Now listen to me, both of you. Arak is
gathering an army from the other villages... He's going to
attack and rescue us.'
   Sabor was horrified. `He mustn't. It's certain death,'
`No, not now. I've given them a way to protect them-selves.
You see, I...'
   The Doctor fell silent as the guard Captain re-entered
the chamber. Another guard was with him, carrying a
strangely shaped saw-edged knife ­ rather like a butcher's
knife. The Captain pointed. `The girl.'
   Sarah screamed as the guard came towards her, knife
raised. With a sudden, practised movement he slit Sarah's
cocoon from top to bottom. She fell out of it, and collapsed
on the floor. Agonies of pins and needles shot through her
body, as her long-constricted muscles re-fused to hold her.
She fainted from the pain. The guard picked her up, slung
her over his shoulder, and carried her away.
   `Where are you taking her?' shouted the Doctor.
   The Captain looked coldly at him. `Your turn will
come.' He turned and followed the guard. Frantically the
Doctor began struggling to escape.
   In Arak's village an army filled the square. Night was
falling now, and the whole square blazed with torches.
There was a low murmur of angry voices. Every man was
armed, some with long-hidden knives and, swords, others
with scythes, bill-hooks and pitchforks ­ anything with an
edge would do to kill a Spider guard. Every man wore a
cloth headband with a brown gem-stone sewn into it.
   Arak raised his hand, and the murmuring was stilled.
`Remember ­ we have nothing to fear. The Doctor has
given us protection. Are we all ready?' A savage roar went
up in reply. Arak's voice rang out in a triumphant shout.
`Forward, then! Death to the Eight-legs!' Arak's mind
formed the word that had been forbidden so long on
Metebelis. The true name of the creatures that oppressed
them. Exultantly, he shouted it out at the top of his voice.
`Death to the Spiders!'
   The crowd took up the shout. `Death to the Spiders!'
Torches blazing, weapons gleaming, they left the village
and set out across the jewelled plain. The women of the
village stood silent, watching the line of torches moving
across the darkness like a snake of fire. Then they returned
to the loneliness of their huts ­ to wait.

                           *****

The Doctor's cocoon was swinging violently to and fro
with the force of his efforts to escape. Sabor watched him
gloomily. `I tell you it's impossible, Doctor...'
   The Doctor spoke in short bursts, grunting with effort.
`Much as I admire your stoic acceptance... of the
inevitable... Sabor old chap... I do wish you'd be quiet.
What I'm trying to do... requires the utmost
concentration.'
   `What are you trying to do?'
   `Little trick I learned from an old friend of mine... feller
named... what was it... Hopkins... no... Heatherington... no,
that wasn't it. Got it! Houdini, Harry Houdini!'
   To his amazement, Sabor saw that the Doctor's head
and shoulders were beginning to emerge from the mouth
of the cocoon. Like a python changing its skin, the Doctor
wriggled out, further and further, until at last he was free.
He struggled out of the cocoon and got to his feet,
stretching and trying to massage his muscles into some
kind of life. He crossed to Sabor and tried to free him too,
but the task was hopeless.
    `It's no good, Sabor, I shall have to leave you. As soon as
I can, I'll come back with one of those knives and set you
free. Oh, and if you hear the sound of fighting, give a jolly
good yell. Your son Arak and his merry men should be
here soon.' With a cheery wave, the Doctor slipped out of
the chamber.
    In another part of the mountain, Sarah waited fearfully.
She was in a small, richly decorated chamber. Physically,
she was in better condition than she had been for some
time. Silent women, obviously slaves of the Spiders, had
massaged her cramped limbs back to life. They had
brought her wine and fruit, and more import-ant still,
water and towels so that she could wash off the grime of
imprisonment. Then they had disappeared silently, leaving
her waiting. But waiting for what? Sarah hoped that it
hadn't all been a Spider's version of fattening up food and
dressing it for the table...
    Suddenly, a huge Spider appeared in the doorway. She
scuttled across the floor and leaped on to a jewelled
cushion.
    Sarah cowered away.
    The Spider spoke, in her high clear voice. `You have no
reason to fear me. I am the Queen. I am going to help you.'
    `Why should you want to help me?'
    `I do not agree with the plans of the Council ­ whether
the Great One supports them or not. To invade the planet
Earth would be a foolhardy venture. Why should we risk
all that we possess here on Metebelis?'
    Sarah understood little of what the Queen Spider was
saying. She listened alertly, trying to see what all this had
to do with herself and the Doctor.
    `I told them I would consult the Great One. But I shall
not!' The Queen went on, `I have lied to the Council. I
intend to help you and the Doctor to escape to Earth.'
    `Why?' asked Sarah bluntly.
    The Queen's reply was indirect. `Do you know of the
blue crystal?' Sarah nodded.
    `Then where is it?'
    `Lupton's got it. He stole it from the Doctor.'
    `He does not have it now,' said the Spider bitterly. `It is
still on Earth.'
    Suddenly Sarah understood. `And you want me and the
Doctor to get it for you?'
    `Yes ­ you must bring it to me. Not to the Council, and
not to the Great One. To me. Otherwise there will be war
between our peoples, and disaster for us all.' The Spider
twitched restlessly on her cushion. `Already rebellion is
beginning on this planet. Many patrols have disappeared.
How can we invade another planet when we are in danger
of losing our own?'
    Sarah wondered what the Queen Spider would say if she
knew that the Doctor was behind the rebellion ­ that even
now an army was on its way? She decided she'd better
accept the offer while there was still time. Once they were
away from this horrible planet, and back on Earth, the
Doctor would sort things out somehow.
    `All right,' she said quickly. `Get us back to Earth and
we'll help you. What do we do now?'
    `Concentrate your mind,' said the Queen Spider. `I shall
lend you some of my powers... Turn your back, my child...'

The Doctor moved swiftly through the tunnels, keeping in
shadow as best he could. Several times he had to duck into
clark corners to avoid patrols. Without the machine, taken
from him when he was first captured, he would be helpless
against the power of the jewelled staves. To avoid
detection, he was forced to move further and further away
from the busier areas. Soon he found himself in an unlit
disused tunnel, like the one by which he had entered. The
Doctor paused to consider his next move.
   Arak and his army would be here soon. He'd stand a far
better chance of rescuing Sarah with their help. He decided
to lie low until the fighting started, and then join up with
them. Suddenly he heard a voice calling from the depths of
the tunnel that stretched away before him. `Doctor,
Doctor!' It was Sarah. He must have stumbled on her place
of imprisonment! Scarcely believing his good luck, the
Doctor began to follow the sound of the voice. Somehow it
seemed to be always just ahead of him. There it was again.
`Help, Doctor, help!' The Doctor ran on, ever deeper into
the blue mountain.
   He noticed that the tunnel walls around him were
taking on a different look. The blue crystals were scattered
ever more thickly. Soon they began to give off a glow of
blue light. More, even fiercer, blue light shone ahead of
him. The Doctor paused, wondering where he was coming
to. This part of the mountain was quite different from
anything he had seen before.
   Still Sarah's voice lured him on. `Doctor, help me!
Please help me!' The more he hesitated, the more
anguished her cries became.
   Suddenly the tunnel came to an end. It opened out into
a huge blue cavern. The walls seemed to have been carved
out of one enormous blue crystal of tremendous size. The
Doctor shielded his eyes against the pulsing light. There,
at the back of the cavern was a gigantic crystal web,
stretching away into the darkness.
   A blue haze seemed to hang in front of it, partly
concealing it from his view.
   `Do not come any further, Doctor. Otherwise you will
die.' The voice was high pitched and edgy, like chalk
squeaking on a slate.
   The Doctor felt the sudden pressure of a mind so
powerful that it threatened to swallow up his own. `I came
to find Sarah,' he said calmly. `I heard her calling to me.'
   A sinister chuckle ran through the cave. `Like this,
Doctor?' asked the voice coyly. To the Doctor's horror,
Sarah's voice came from the centre of the web.

`Half a pound of tuppeny rice
  Half a pound of treacle
  That's the way the money goes...'

`Pop goes the weasel,' finished the Doctor ruefully,
realising how easily he had been tricked. His voice
hardened. `Who are you? What do you want with me?'
   `I am the Great One. I want to help you, Doctor.'
   The Doctor peered through the blue haze. Was there a
vast shape in that web? `Why can't I see you properly?'
   `You will, Doctor, you will. All in good time. When you
bring me the crystal you stole from me.'
   The Doctor took another step forward.
   `Stay!' said the voice imperiously. `I tell you no one ­ no
one ­ save myself may enter the cave of crystal and live. No
two-legs, no eight-legs, not even the Queen herself ­ for all
her boasting.'
   The Doctor retreated. He suspected that she was telling
the truth: that here in this amazing cave the vibrations of
the blue crystals were so concentrated that they destroyed
both body and mind. Presumably the Great One had
somehow managed to adapt to them, but at what fearful
cost?
   As he retreated, he heard the piercing voice echoing
round the cave. `Go, Doctor. You must hurry back and
fetch me the crystal. I must have it. I must have it. I must
have it.'
   As the Doctor hurried away, one thought dominated his
mind. Whatever powers, whatever towering intelligence
the Great One had attained, the price had been too high.
   The Great One was mad.

The battle of the blue mountain was short and bloody. The
Spiders' guards, so long accustomed to ruling by fear, so
long dependent on the power of their jewelled staves, had
little experience of real hand-to-hand fighting, and little
taste for it.
    Arak and his men fell upon them savagely, killing all
who resisted them. The little army flooded into the
tunnels, meeting and despatching guard after guard. Arak
at their head, they penetrated deeper and deeper into the
Spiders' fortress. The gloomy tunnels rang with the clash
of arms, and the shouts of angry men.
    Wrapped helpless in his cocoon, old Sabor listened with
growing hope as the sound of fighting came ever nearer.
Remembering the Doctor's advice, he began to shout,
yelling until his throat was hoarse. At last he heard a
familiar voice in reply.
    `Father, it is I, Arak. I come!' Moments later, Arak ran
into the chamber, Tuar at his heels. Both wore the
protective headbands, both carried bloody swords in their
hands. They rushed to the cocoon and cut Sabor free. They
had to hold him upright between them, for he was far too
weak to stand. Sabor was weeping with joy. Arak hugged
him fiercely. `Come, Father, we have work to do. Let us get
you out of this accursed place.'
    Supporting the old man between them, they left the
chamber. As they went along the tunnels, Sabor said
suddenly, `The Doctor ­ is he with you? They took the girl
and then the Doctor escaped...'
    `We'll find him, Father,' said Tuar. `All Metebelis owes
him a great debt. Come!' Gently they led the old man
towards the daylight that he had thought never to see
again.
    Sarah ran full tilt through the tunnels towards the
sound of battle. Once or twice, terrified, fleeing guards
passed her, but they paid her no attention, concerned only
with escaping from Arak and his men. Inside her head,
Sarah could hear the voice of the Queen Spider. `This way,
my child. This way. I can sense that the Doctor is near...'
    And, sure enough, the Doctor suddenly came dashing
out of one of the side tunnels almost knocking Sarah over.
He gripped her shoulders, overjoyed. `Sarah, you're safe!
Where have you been?'
   She didn't seem to hear him. Her face was white and
strained ­ naturally enough after all she'd been through,
thought the Doctor.
   `Listen, Doctor, we're going to escape,' she said. `Hold
my hands.'
   The Doctor wondered if her terrible experiences had
affected her mind, but decided to humour her. `Of course
we are,' he said soothingly.
   `Hold my hands, Doctor.' Her voice was fierce and
urgent. Wonderingly, the Doctor obeyed. Sarah's hands
gripped his own tightly. The Doctor felt the sudden
characteristic snatching sensation of teleportation, and
found himself, still clasping hands with Sarah, standing by
the TARDIS in the square of Arak's village.
   `Pop goes the Weasel,' said the Doctor, for no very good
reason. He looked at Sarah curiously. `However did you
learn to do that?'
   Sarah grinned, looking more like her old self. `Nothing
to it really ­ the Queen taught me. Come on ­ I'll explain
on the way back.'
   The Doctor approached the door of the TARDIS. He
felt around his neck, and turned to Sarah in consternation.
`The key ­ it's gone!'
   `It's all right,' said Sarah soothingly. `I've got it.' She
unlocked the TARDIS' door, and held it open for him.
   Just before going in, the Doctor paused. `We seem to
have been away quite a while. I wonder what's been
happening back on Earth.'
                        10
                  Return to Earth
When all the excitement surrounding the disappearance of
Lupton and Sarah had died down, Mike Yates found
himself suffering from a powerful feeling of anti-climax.
There had been no news of the Doctor since his mad dash
back to the TARDIS, and Yates couldn't summon up the
courage to call the Brigadier and ask him for an
explanation.
   The night after the disappearance there had been one
minor mystery to divert his mind. Unable to sleep, he'd
gone down to the library to get a book, and disturbed some
mysterious visitor.
   He'd caught a glimpse of a bulky figure disappearing
through the French windows and thought it might be
Tommy. But it didn't seem likely. Yates had then chosen a
book for himself and gone to bed.
   It wasn't till the afternoon of the following day that he
got the feeling that things were happening again. Lupton's
old cronies ­ Barnes, Moss, Keaver, and Lands ­ started
gathering for whispered conversations in corners. Yates
decided to keep an eye on them. It would give him
something to do.
   Meanwhile, in his cubby hole under the stairs, Tommy
sat grappling with a tremendous problem. Something
wonderful and frightening was happening to Tommy. He
was starting to think. The transformation had begun just
after Lupton, the Doctor, and Tommy's new friend Sarah,
had all disappeared.
   Tommy had tried to give Sarah the blue crystal for a
present before she vanished. Now she had gone, he was left
with it on his hands ­ and on his conscience. Tommy knew
that it was wrong of him to have stolen the crystal from
Lupton's room. His attempt to give it to Sarah had been a
childish effort to transfer the burden of guilt. He couldn't
even return it to Lupton, since Lupton had gone away too.
   Tommy spent the rest of the day crouched in his tiny
cupboard, studying the blue crystal and wondering what to
do with it. The little glowing fires in the crystal seemed to
soothe him. Then they seemed almost to talk to him,
telling him that there were things he had to do. But what
things?
   He rummaged in his box of treasures and produced a
tatty child's primer ­ a relic of the days before people had
given up trying to teach him anything. He'd hung on to it
in the vain hope that one clay the mysterious black
squiggles called letters would unlock their secrets. Now,
with the blue crystal shining beside him, he tried again.
Slowly at first, then quicker and quicker, he began to read.
`We go to school, we read our books, we play with our
toys.' He raced through the little book in minutes, then
buried his head in his hands, overcome by the wonder of it.
He could read!
   That night Tommy had sneaked down to the library
and tried to read the books on the shelves. He stood
enraptured by the poetry of William Blake.

Tyger, tyger, burning bright
  In the forests of the night...

It was pretty. No, it was beautiful. Then, frightened by the
arrival of Yates, he had fled. Perhaps he had been wrong to
run. Yates was his friend. Yates had always been kind to
him. Maybe he should go and look for him.
   Yates, by now, was busy on his investigation. Pre-
tending to sleep in the library, he'd seen Barnes chatting to
Moss and Keaver, two of Lupton's old cronies. He could
have sworn he heard the word `meeting'. Still pretending
to doze, he'd seen them all move off, making an elaborate
pretence of going in different directions. Waiting enough
time to give them a chance to get going, Yates rose to his
feet and moved off after them.
    His sandalled feet made no sound as he crept along the
corridor. Barnes was the nearest thing to a leader, now that
Lupton was gone. The meeting, if there was one, would be
in his room. Yates moved quietly up to the door. Sure
enough, a DO NOT DISTURB notice hung on the door-
knob. Yates grinned. Talk about advertising! They were
the most inept bunch of conspirators he'd ever had to
tackle.
    He bent down and put his ear to the keyhole. He could
hear a low mumble of voices. He managed to pick out
Barnes' voice. `Lupton may not be dead. Maybe he just
can't get back. If that's the case, we've got to try and help
him. We must re-establish the link.'
    Yates straightened up and smiled. It looked as if the
conspirators' interests and his own were the same. He
rapped firmly on the door.
    There was a sudden tremendous flurry and scurry from
inside. Yates rapped again and said, `You might as well
open up, Barnes. I'm coming in.'
    One click and the door was unlocked. Barnes' voice
called shakily, `Come in then if you must.'
    Yates went into the room. It was in semi-darkness,
curtains drawn. A little reading lamp formed a pool of light
around the armchair where Barnes sat, looking elaborately
unconcerned. `You may as well stop all this nonsense,' said
Yates. `Tell your friends to come out of hiding. I've been
listening at the door and...' Lights exploded inside his
skull, and everything went black.
    Some time later, Yates woke up, gagged, bound hand
and foot, with a nasty lump on the back of his head. He
was on Barnes' bed. The room was empty. `Fine
investigator I made,' he thought to himself. It had never
struck him that such a clownish bunch of plotters could be
dangerous. He guessed that one of them had struck him
down in blind panic. Now they'd got him, they probably
had no idea what to do next.
    His theory was confirmed when Barnes came in and
stood looking worriedly down at him. Yates made gurgling
noises through his gag, indicating that he wanted to talk.
After a moment Barnes hesitantly removed the gag. `Well?'
he said, with nervous truculence.
    Yates licked his dry lips. `What are you going to do ­
about Lupton?'
    `What can we do?'
    `I heard you talking, remember. You said you wanted to
re-establish the link.'
    Barnes glared at him suspiciously. `What if I did?'
    `It's just that I think you're quite right,' said Yates
persuasively. `Lupton's probably stranded somewhere,
waiting for you to do just that. You can't abandon him.'
    `The ritual really needs five of us. Lupton was the only
one powerful enough to use it alone ­ now he's gone,'
replied Barnes.
    `I'll help you. That's what I was coming to say, when
some idiot crowned me.'
    `You? Why should you help me?'
    `Because of Sarah. If we get Lupton back, we may get her
back. Or at least, he may be able to tell us what happened
to her.'
    Yates was telling the truth, more or less. What he didn't
say was why he was keen to get Lupton back. He simply
wanted the chance to throttle a few answers out of him.
    Barnes was still frightened. `How do I know this isn't
some kind of trick?'
    `Oh, for Pete's sake,' said Yates exasperatedly. `Of course
it isn't. Now, just you untie me and we'll say no more about
my bump on the head.' There was real authority in Yates'
voice. Barnes bent over and started undoing the knots.
    Crouched in his cupboard, Tommy sat peering into the
crystal. He wanted to find Yates and ask his advice. But
suppose Yates said he must give up the crystal. He heard
voices in the corridor outside. He opened his cupboard a
crack to listen. Yates ­ and Barnes was with him. Strange
that. They'd never been friends...
   `We'll meet in.the cellar then,' Yates was saying. `Half
an hour's time O.K.?'
   `I suppose so,' replied Barnes gloomily. `It may do some
good. I haven't had a moment's peace since Lupton
vanished...'
   The voices faded away down the corridor. Tommy
frowned. He was grappling with his foggy memories of a
few days ago, before the miraculous change came over him.
Everything had been cloudy then. Sarah had said something
about the cellar ­ and about Lupton in the cellar.
Something bad had happened, and Lupton and Sarah had
gone away. Now it was going to happen again. Tommy
came to a decision. `Cho-Je. I'll tell Cho-Je...'
   He put the crystal back in its hiding place and went out.

                         *****

Lupton and the Spider Council were in hiding, deep in the
heart of the Spider Citadel. In the tunnels above them, the
battle still raged. Their guards were being killed one by
one. But, as yet, this secret inner room had not been found.
If they could remain undiscovered for just a little longer,
they might yet snatch victory from near-defeat.
   Lupton watched as the Spider Council crouched in a
semi-circle. They seemed rapt with concentration. He
turned to his Spider. `What is happening?'
   `Contact has been re-established ­ the path is open.'
   `And where is this contact?'
   `In the place you yourself first opened,' replied one of
the other Spiders.
   Lupton's eyes lit up. `The monastery? Then the group
must be operating again. You'd better be careful. They're
weak. They may not be trustworthy'.
   `Then our approach shall be secret. Begin.'
   The Spider Council set up a low humming. One of the
Spiders moved to the centre of the circle. It glowed, and
then disappeared. Another Spider moved forward to take
its place.
    Yates sat round the mandala in the monastery cellar,
chanting with the others, and wondered what the devil he
was doing. They'd been at it for what seemed ages now,
and still nothing was happening. True, the un-earthly glow
had appeared around the mandala. But after that, nothing :
no Lupton, no spiders, and above all, no Sarah. Yates
began to feel that he must be as mad as the rest of this
potty little group of would-be super-men...
    (A spider materialised unseen, not on the mandala but in
the darkness outside the circle. It scuttled away into a
corner. Another and another followed it...)

In Cho-Je's room Tommy was finishing his story. `So I
thought I'd better come and make a clean breast of it all.
I'm only sorry about not coming before.'
   Cho-Je shook his head. `Dear me, these foolish fellows. I
really should have believed the Doctor, eh?' He jumped
nimbly to his feet.
   `Don't you think we should tell K'anpo?'
   `Indeed we shall tell the Abbot ­ when we know what to
tell him! Now, Tommy, you go and get this crystal, while I
go to the cellar and see what these naughty fellows are
about. Off you go.'
   Tommy was about to obey when something struck him.
`You don't seem very surprised about the way I've
changed.'
   Cho-Je chuckled. `When everything is new, how can
anything be a surprise? Now go.'
   Baffled, but somehow reassured, Tommy followed him
from the room.

Unaware that they were getting some rather spectacular
results, the little group in the cellar continued chanting.
Suddenly Yates became aware that the cellar door was
opening. Cho-Je was standing at the top of the steps.
`That's torn it,' he thought ruefully. `Not that we were
getting anywhere.' It was the first time he had ever seen
Cho-Je angry. The little monk was literally hopping with
rage.
   `You must stop,' Cho-Je splintered. `You are the most
misguided of men! Did I not warn you?'
   Suddenly a giant Spider appeared, swinging on a strand
of its web through the air towards Cho-Je. Cho-Je raised
his hands in disquiet, and began an Incantation of
Banishment. But it was too late. A crackling finger of flame
shot from the Spider's body and the frail little monk
crumpled to the ground.
   Appalled, Yates leaped to his feet and made for the
steps. Another Spider sprang from the darkness and
blasted him down.
   Barnes, Moss, Keaver and Lands also jumped to their
feet. From the dark corners of the cellar, the giant Spiders
moved in to surround them. An icy voice ordered : `Turn
your backs.'
   Minutes later, everything was quiet. The bodies of Mike
Yates and Cho-Je lay on the steps.
   A sudden groaning, wheezing noise filled the air, and a
blue police box materialised in the middle of the cellar.
The TARDIS door opened, and Sarah and the Doctor
stepped out.
   The Doctor looked round him in some surprise. `Well
how very ­' He broke off as he saw the two bodies on the
steps. He ran across to them, Sarah close behind.
   The Doctor examined first Mike and then Cho-Je. `At
least they're not dead...' he said.
   Four men came out of the dark cellar corners and
marched towards them: Barnes, Moss, Keaver and Lands ­
the remaining members of Lupton's group. `Now, then,'
said the Doctor thoughtfully, `what have you chaps been
up to, eh?'
   The four men made no reply. Instead, acting as one,
they extended their hands in a curious pointing gesture.
   With a thrill of horror, the Doctor realised the Spiders
had reached earth before them. And they had found new
servants...
                     11
         The Battle with the Spiders
The Doctor's mind was working at tremendous speed.
After so many dangers on Metebelis ­ to come back to this!
He looked keenly at the four men. If he jumped the middle
two ­ no, it was no good. The other two would attack him,
and after that, all four would finish him off, And Sarah
too... The Doctor glanced at her. Her face was set, showing
no sign of fear.
   The cellar door crashed open and Tommy came
hurtling down the steps. He crashed into the four men like
a human cannon ball, sending them reeling all over the
cellar. `Doctor, Sarah, quickly,' he yelled, `up the stairs.'
   They ran past him and Tommy backed away after them,
his face turned towards the four men, who were now
picking themselves up. Barnes, the first to recover, sent a
blast of energy crackling towards Tommy, who took it
fairly in the chest. But he did not fall. He winced a little,
and then backed slowly up the stairs. He jumped through
the door at the top, slammed it and locked it behind him.
   `No,' gasped Sarah. `What about Mike and Cho-Je?'
   `They'll be out cold for quite a while yet,' said the
Doctor. `While they're unconscious they'll be safe.'
   An angry banging came from inside the cellar. `We'd
better get a move on,' said Tommy. `That door won't hold
four men for long. Would you come with me, please?' he
added politely. `The Abbot is waiting to see you.'
   The Doctor and Sarah looked at him in amazement,
Now the excitement was over, they had time to realise that
this was a very different Tommy.
   `What happened to you?' asked Sarah, as they ran along
the corridor.
   `No idea,' said Tommy. `Don't understand it myself.'
   `But you're just like everyone else!'
    Tommy grinned. `I sincerely hope not,' he said, and
held open the door to the Abbot's room.
    The big room was almost completely bare except for a
few scattered rugs and a Tibetan prayer-wheel. A carved
wooden chair stood in the middle of the polished floor. In
it sat a very old man wearing the robes of a Tibetan Abbot.
His eyes were closed, either in sleep or in meditation.
Behind him, in the corner, was a little shrine, candles and
incense burning before it.
    `This is the Doctor, Rinpoche' said Tommy softly. The
old man opened his eyes. `I know. You are welcome'.
    `And this is my friend Sarah Jane Smith,' Tommy
added.
    The Abbot gave Sarah one of the wannest, kindest
smiles she had ever seen. `It is kind of you to come and
visit an old man.'
    `Forgive me, Master,' said the Doctor, dropping
instinctively into Tibetan. `I come before you with my
hands empty of gifts. Alas, I have no cotton scarf to offer
you.'
    In the same tongue the old man answered, `Such a
ceremonial gift is merely the symbol of friendship. We
have no need of symbols, you and I.'
    The Doctor looked at him curiously. The Abbot seemed
to be implying that they were old friends. Yet, to the best
of the Doctor's recollection, he had never seen K'anpo
before. Of course, during a very long life, and several
different incarnations, the Doctor had met a great number
of people. Perhaps it would come back to him.
    `I'd better keep watch,' said Tommy. `They'll be out of
that cellar soon.'
    K'anpo Rinpoche closed his eyes momentarily. Yet
somehow he seemed to be looking. He opened them again.
    `As yet they have not managed it,' he said placidly, `but
they will ­ very soon.'
    Tommy slipped out of the room and the old Abbot
turned to the Doctor. `Now, Doctor, I think you have a
story to tell me.'
   `Somehow I have a feeling you already know most of it.
It concerns a certain blue crystal that I found...'
   `Found?' interrupted the old man gently.
   The Doctor rubbed his chin. Sarah could see that he was
rather taken aback. `Well, perhaps "stole" would be a better
word.' The Doctor looked at the old man sharply. `Forgive
me ­ but have we met before?'
   K'anpo smiled benignly. `The recognition of friends is
not always easy. Tell me about the crystal that you ­ stole.'
   The Doctor cleared his throat. `Ah, well, yes... It didn't
occur to me that I was stealing it of course ­ not at the
time...'
   As the Doctor launched into his narrative, Sarah sat
back unnoticed watching the calm face of K'anpo
Rinpoche. There was something very strange, very
powerful, about this frail old man. Sarah could see that the
Doctor had noticed it too.

With a wrenching and tearing noise, the cellar door burst
open at last, the iron lock torn clean from the wood.
Barnes, Moss, Keaver and Lands all tumbled out into the
corridor on top of one another. Barnes assumed control.
`We must spread out and search for them. They won't have
gone far.'
   Little Moss shook his head vigorously. He'd had
enough. `I'm leaving. I don't want anything more to do
with it.' He had time to take only a single step before
something inside his head caught and twisted at his mind.
Moss screamed, his hands clawing at his temples. `No, no,
please stop it. I'll do anything. Please, make it stop!'
   The pain died, and the icy voice in his head said, `You
will obey me?'
   Moss sobbed, `Yes, yes, anything.'
   The four men stood looking at each other. The taciturn
Keaver said slowly, `What are we supposed to do?'
   `I can see a stone,' said Lands, `a blue stone...'
   `Yes ­ you must find the crystal,' said the icy voice of a
Spider. `Concentrate. All concentrate.'
   After a moment Barnes said, `Yes, I can see it too. It's
that way.'
   The little group of men moved slowly but surely to-
wards the Abbot's room.

`The crystal must be more important than I ever realised,'
concluded the Doctor. `Obviously the Spiders need it very
badly. I think it's the last piece in the jigsaw of their
power.'
   `Then perhaps they should have it,' said the Abbot.
   The Doctor knew that the suggestion was made only to
test his response. `Never. I've seen how they rule on
Metebelis Three. Something tells me that if they get their
hands on the crystal, nothing will stop them from taking
over the Earth.'
   `Or even the Universe,' said Sarah suddenly. Both men
looked at her. Her eyes were wide, her expression intent.
Again, the Doctor thought that there had been something
strained about Sarah ever since their reunion in the
Spiders' Citadel. It was as if, in some way, the Spiders had
left their mark on her. As soon as all this was over, he'd see
that she took a very long rest. He turned back to the Abbot.
   `As Sarah says, they may even want to take over the
Universe. I only wish I knew where the crystal was now.
Sarah tells me that Lupton didn't succeed in taking it to
Metebelis Three after all.'
   K'anpo Rinpoche opened his hands, which had been
folded on his lap. In his palm nestled the blue crystal.
`Tommy brought it to me,' he said simply. The Doctor
smiled.
   `Yes, of course. I should have known the moment I saw
the change in him. The crystal cleared his mind. Thank
Heavens it's safe.'
   `Give it to me,' said Sarah suddenly.
   The Doctor looked at her astonished. `Sarah, what's the
matter?'
    When Sarah spoke next, it was in the voice of the Queen
Spider. `Give me the crystal. I must have it. I must have
it...'
    She went to snatch the crystal, but the Doctor stepped
in front of her. Instantly Sarah's hand came up in a
pointing gesture, and a blast of mental energy sent the
Doctor reeling back. Sarah stepped forward to snatch the
crystal from the Abbot's lap.
    The old man raised a warning hand. `Stay, I command
you!'
    Sarah stopped. The power which controlled her mind
was blocked by the Abbot's will.
    Still wincing from the attack, the Doctor stepped
forward. `Sarah, listen to me...'
    K'anpo shook his head. `She cannot hear you, Doctor.
See!' The shape of the Queen Spider had materialised on
Sarah's back.
    `Give me the crystal, old man, or you die!' continued
Sarah in the Spider's cruel voice.
    `Struggle against the Spider, Sarah,' said the Doctor
fiercely. `Fight it!'
    Sarah spoke again in the Spider's voice. `I am the
Queen! Obey me! Give me the crystal!'
    `No,' said the Abbot gently. `You are Sarah. Remember
that you are Sarah.'
    The struggle between Sarah's true self and the
controlling Spider Queen locked her lips. She could make
only guttural choking sounds.
    `Look into the crystal,' said the Doctor suddenly. `Look
into its blue light and see that you are free.'
    Sarah swayed to and fro in great distress. The voice
from her lips fluctuated, sometimes coming out as her own
voice, sometimes as that of the Spider Queen. `I am the
Queen. No, no, I am Sarah. I am free. I am the Queen, the
Queen must live...'
    The Doctor and K'anpo leaned over her trying
desperately to help. `Concentrate on the crystal, Sarah,'
repeated the Doctor.
   `You... are... free,' urged K'anpo. `You do not have to be
dominated. Look and see that you are free.'
   Sarah gazed into the crystal. Slowly, she felt her mind
coming back under her own control.
   The Queen Spider on Sarah's back twitched and fell on
the floor. Having been defeated by her host at last, she gave
a high piercing cry, her body twisted and writhed, then
withered away to nothing. Sarah sobbed in relief, and fell
forward into the Doctor's arms.

Outside the Abbot's door Tommy heard footsteps moving
stealthily towards him. Barnes and his friends crept round
the corner. They moved as one, like Zombies. They came
to a halt when they saw Tommy, and then moved forward
menacingly.
   `Get out of our way, Tommy,' said Barnes.
   Tommy shook his head. `You can't go in there.'
   Barnes raised his hand and pointed. There was a line of
fire, the crackle of a mental-energy attack caused Tommy
to stumble back, but he remained on his feet.
   `Rush him!' ordered Barnes, and all four men ran at
Tommy at once. They soon discovered their mistake. One
by one, Tommy plucked them off, and hurled them down
the corridor. Barnes was the last to be thrown aside. He fell
awkwardly, sliding down the wall.
   `Sorry, Mr. Barnes,' said Tommy gently. `You can't go
in there.'
   Barnes staggered to his feet. `Kill him,' he ordered
viciously. All four men pointed at Tommy and blasted him
with the power imparted by the Spiders. Tommy reeled
and staggered, gripping the door frame for support. But at
the end of the attack he was still on his feet, and still
blocking the doorway with his massive body.
   Barnes and the others fell back, gasping and drained.
Inside their heads, the Spiders' voices conferred. `We need
more power.'
   `I agree! We need more power.'
   `Concentrate, Sisters.'
   `Concentrate...'
   Barnes and the others gathered in a circle, and closed
their eyes. A low humming filled the hallway. Tommy
looked on, and braced himself for the next attack. He was
determined that they should never enter that room while
he was alive to stop them.

Sarah sobbed. `I'm sorry, Doctor.'
   `Don't be. You did very well, Sarah. You freed yourself.'
   Sarah shuddered. `But I let that creature take me over.'
   K'anpo said gently, `We are all apt to surrender ourself
to domination. Not all spiders are on the back.'
   Suddenly the Doctor swung round on K'anpo. `Of
course. I know who you are now.'
   `You were always a little slow on the uptake, my boy.'
The Doctor and K'anpo clasped hands, like old friends
meeting after long years of separation.
   `It's been a long time,' said the Doctor affectionately,
Sarah looked from one to the other of them. `Then you two
have met before?'
   The Doctor said, `He was my teacher, my guru, if you
like. You've heard me speak of him.'
   Sarah said, `So you're a Time Lord too?'
   K'anpo nodded. `But the discipline they imposed was
not for me.'
   `Or me,' said the Doctor.
   `We both had to get away.'
   `The Doctor, er, borrowed a TARDIS and set off on his
wanderings. And I regenerated and came here to Earth.'
   `Regenerated?' said Sarah weakly.
   `When a Time Lord's body wears out,' explained the
Doctor, `it can regenerate ­ become new.'
   Sarah shook her head, baffled. A thought struck her.
`What about Cho-Je? Is he a Time Lord, too?'
  K'anpo smiled. `Cho-Je is merely a projection. You
might say he was my other self.'

Mike Yates recovered consciousness, to see Cho-Je leaning
over him, apparently none the worse. `Come, Mr. Yates,'
said the little monk. `There is no time to lose.' Groggily,
Mike got to his feet and followed Cho-Je out of the cellar.

Outside the Abbot's door, Barnes and the others still stood
in a circle. Tommy watched and waited, bracing himself
for the final ordeal.
   In his room, K'anpo stood up. `I have enjoyed our
reunion, Doctor. But now the moment approaches.'
   `What moment?' asked Sarah.
   `The moment of death,' said the old man placidly. `The
moment I have been waiting for. You know what to do,
Doctor?'
   Sarah had never seen the Doctor so uncertain. `No,' he
said, `I'm not sure...'
   `I think you do know, my son,' said the old man softly.
`What is it that you most fear?'
   The Doctor looked at him despairingly. `There is no
other way?'
   `None.'
   The Doctor heaved a sigh, seeming to accept some fate
that was inevitable, but far from pleasant. `Very well. Give
me the crystal.'
   Sarah looked from one to the other in anguish. `What is
happening, Doctor? What are you planning to do?'
   The Doctor looked at her in surprise. `The only thing I
can do. I started all this trouble by taking the crystal. Now
I must set things right by returning it to the cave of the
Great One.'
   Outside, the little group ceased their concentration.
Barnes spoke but it was the voice of his Spider that came
from his lips. `Enough. The power is sufficient.' As they
swung round on Tommy, Cho-Je and Yates came along the
corridor. Barnes shouted `Now!'
   A tremendous web of energy crackled around the four
men. It flung Tommy, Yates and Cho-Je to one side like
thistledown. Barnes and the others rushed into the Abbot's
room.
   Facing them were Sarah, the Doctor, and K'anpo. The
Doctor held the crystal in his hand. K'anpo jumped in
front of the Doctor as if to protect the crystal with his frail
body. The energy web crackled, K'anpo fell ­ and the
Doctor disappeared, winking out of existence.
   The four men froze for a moment. Then Barnes said in
his Spider's voice, `He is in the cellar ­ come!'
   They rushed from the room. Sarah knelt by K'anpo's
body. He seemed completely lifeless.
   Teleported by the force of the old Time Lord's will, the
Doctor found himself standing beside the TARDIS, crystal
in hand. He produced the TARDIS key, opened the door
and     disappeared      inside.      Seconds     later,   the
dematerialisation began. Barnes and the others rushed into
the cellar, just in time to see the TARDIS vanish. The
Doctor was on his way to confront his last enemy.
                        12
                  The Last Enemy
The Doctor stepped from the TARDIS and looked
cautiously about him. As he had expected, he had
materialised in the heart of the Spider Citadel, not far from
the cave of the Great One. He was at the junction of four
tunnels. He could see by the concentration of blue crystals
glowing in the walls that he was in the right area. But he
was still unsure of the right way to go. All the tunnels
looked exactly alike.
   Suddenly Arak and Tuar came along the tunnel to his
left, both with swords in their hands. He greeted them
with pleasure. `Your attack was a success then?'
   Arak nodded. `Thanks to you, Doctor.' There was no joy
in Arak's voice. The Doctor assumed that he was exhausted
from the fighting.
   `Now I need your help, my friends,' he said. `I need to
go to the Cave of the Crystal.'
   Tuar said flatly, `If you go into the cave you will die.
The power of the crystals is so concentrated that it will kill
you.'
   `I have to go. Will you show me the way?'
   Arak nodded. `Come, Doctor.'
   They led the Doctor along an endless maze of tunnels,
until at last they came to a blank wall. Arak touched his
palm to it and immediately a stone slid back, revealing a
small archway. Arak stepped back. `Through there,
Doctor.' The Doctor stepped through, and found himself
facing Lupton and the web which held the full Council of
the Spiders. He turned to run, but Arak and Tuar were
behind him with drawn swords.
   The Doctor sighed. `The rebellion failed then?' Arak
and Tar did not speak.
   One of the Spiders, evidently the new Queen, answered
him. `No, Doctor, it succeeded,' she said venomously. `The
rest of the mountain is in the hands of the rebels you
stirred up against us. But here, in the heart of the
mountain, close to the Cave of Crystal, the protection you
gave them was weakened. These two were rash. They
ventured too far, and we captured their minds.'
   Another Spider joined in. `We kept them alive to be sure
of trapping you. We felt sure you would return. Now we
have the crystal and they will die. All the rebels will die,
and Metebelis will be ours again. Then Earth, then any
planet we choose to take!'
   The new Queen said eagerly, `We know you have the
crystal. We can feel it. Give it to us.'
   Slowly the Doctor took the crystal from his pocket. He
held it high. A hum of excitement rose from the Council.
The Doctor's voice cut through it. `I came back here at the
express command of the Great One. I came to return the
crystal to her. Think well. We are close to her cave.
Perhaps she reads your thoughts. Is there anyone here who
would dare to take the crystal from me?'
   There was a moment's silence. Then Lupton stepped
forward. `I would dare.' He turned to address the Council.
`Give the crystal to this mad Great One of yours and she'll
have power to destroy the lot of us. I will take it.'
   He stepped forward to reach out for the crystal. The
Queen Spider said, `Lupton!' The will of the united Spider
Council held Lupton in a grip of iron. He froze, statue-like.
His fingers were inches from the crystal.
   He spoke with enormous effort. `But why? All we
planned, all we dreamed of, is there in the palm of his
hand. The recapture of Metebelis, the conquest of the
Earth, the conquest of a thousand planets.' Lupton babbled
on, but his voice was drowned by the chanting of the
Council.
   `The Great One is all seeing.'
   `The Great One is all knowing.'
   `The Great One is all powerful.'
    The Spider Queen said, `You have beaten us, Doctor. It
is good that you will die. Go!'
    The Doctor turned. Arak and Tuar stood aside. The
Doctor looked at them sadly and walked through the arch.
    Once he was gone the Spiders loosed the constraint of
their will, and Lupton found he could move again. He
swung round on the Council, shaking with fury. `You
fools! Stupid, cowardly, superstitious fools!'
    Fiercely the Queen said `Be silent, Lupton.'
    Lupton should have seen that his usefulness, never very
great, was now over. His life hung by a thread as fine as a
Spider's web. Lost to all sense of self-preservation, he
ranted on. `To think I've lost my chance of power, my
chance to rule the whole rotten stinking world.' He was
almost weeping with rage. `And all because of a lot of
Spiders.'
    A shudder of horror went round the Council at the
forbidden word. Lupton saw it, and was glad.
    `Yes, Spiders! Spiders I'd crush underfoot on Earth
without a second thought.'
    Lupton actually raised a foot to stamp on the Spider
Queen. At once energy-blasts flashed forth from every
member of the Council. All the hatred and bitterness of
their defeat was poured out upon him. The crackle of the
web of power lifted his body and held it, screaming and
glowing and twisting in the air. Then it dropped to the
ground, a shattered lump.
    The Queen spoke. `This two-legs can do us a last
service, my sisters. Let us feast on our favourite food once
more before the end.'
    The Spider Council began to close in on Lupton's body.

                         *****

Tommy recovered consciousness to see Cho-Je bending
over him. `You are well, Tommy. That is good.' Cho-Je
moved across to Yates. He knelt beside him, his face grave.
Tommy struggled over to join him.
   `I think he's dead, Cho-Je.'
   `Not yet. Let us take him to K'anpo Rinpoche. He will
heal him.' Together they managed to manhandle Yates'
inert body into the Abbot's room. K'anpo was sitting up in
his chair, helped there by Sarah.
   He looked weak and shaken, but his eyes were bright
and alert. Cho-Je and Tommy carried Yates across to the
chair and propped him up, resting his head in the old
Abbot's lap. `Please, can't you help him?' asked Sarah.
   K'anpo seemed to brace himself for one final effort. He
laid his hands on Yates' forehead, and closed his eyes in
concentration. Then he opened them, smiling. After a
moment Yates too opened his eyes and struggled to sit up.
`Hullo, Sarah Jane,' he said weakly.
   `His courage and compassion protected him,' said the
Abbot. `You too, my son,' he added, turning to Tommy.
`Your mind was as new and fresh as a child's! Innocence
was your shield. That is why the evil of the Spiders' minds
could not destroy you.'
   Yates struggled to his feet and stretched.
   `We thought you'd had it,' said Sarah.
   He grinned. `Not this time ­ I feel fine now.'
   Suddenly Tommy gave a cry of alarm. `K'anpo!'
   The old man lay back in his chair, shaking and gasping
for breath. He smiled weakly at them. `I'm very much
afraid this old body has "had it" as you say.' He produced
the newly-learned colloquialism with evident pride.
   Sarah felt herself starting to cry. `Oh no, you can't die.
You can't.'
   The Abbot looked distressed. `Please, do not grieve, my
friends.' His head fell back. Cho-Je, who had been sitting
cross-legged beside him, suddenly vanished. As they
watched, the body of K'anpo began to glow with a golden
light. His features blurred and swam, and then seemed to
settle into those of Cho-Je. The glow faded and now Cho-Je
sat in the chair, beaming at them. `I was not dying, you see,
I was merely regenerating.'
   Tommy shook his head in amazement. `Cho-Je ­ `
   Cho-Je shook his head and held up a warning finger.
`No, no. I was Cho-Je, I am now K'anpo. Or, if you prefer, I
am both!'
   Sarah said shakily, `Look, whoever, whichever, you are,
I'm glad you're all right again. But please can you tell us
what's happening to the Doctor? Is he still in the
monastery?'
   Cho-Je shook his head. `I fear by now he is back on
Metcbclis Three.'
   `When will he come back?'
   Cho-Je's face was grave. He took Sarah's hand. `I am
sorry to have to tell you, my dear young lady, that it is
highly unlikely that you, or anyone else, will ever see the
Doctor again.'

                         *****

The Doctor wandered through the glowing blue tunnels
with no very clear idea where he was going. He simply took
the paths leading downwards, or those where the blue glow
was brightest. He plodded on and on with the crystal
clutched in his hand. He seemed to be in a kind of endless
nightmare. At last he came to a tunnel he knew. At the end
of it he saw the deep blue glow of the Cave of Crystal. The
Doctor paused for a moment, as if to brace himself. Then
he moved on down the tunnel.
   This time when he came to the cave he did not stop but
walked straight on into its blue glow. At once the sweet,
mad voice of the Great One sounded in his ears. `Stop!
Have you brought me the crystal?'
   Wearily the Doctor said `If I had not, why should I have
returned?'
   `Very well. Advance.'
   The Doctor walked on into the blue haze. As he went
on, it seemed to clear. He looked around him in awe. He
was in a vast blue cave, the size of a cathedral. The walls
shimmered and glowed with uncanny light. The crystal in
his hand picked them up, and returned the glow. At the far
end of the cave was a complicated lattice-work, a sort of
super-web made entirely from blue crystal. At the centre of
it sat the most enormous Spider the Doctor had ever seen,
larger by a hundred times than her sisters who ruled the
planet. He was looking at the Great One. The last wonder
he would ever see.
    `Why have you come?' she asked. `Why have you
destroyed yourself?'
    `I want to make you see that what you plan to do is
wrong.'
    `I am the Great One. I can do no wrong.'
    `I will bargain with you. Take the crystal and let the
humans live in peace ­ here and on Earth.'
    Mad laughter rang through the Crystal Cave. `What do
you think I care for the plans of my subjects? Earth is
nothing to me. Give me the crystal!'
    Even in such an extreme situation, the Doctor's
scientific curiosity was still strong. It had been a dominant
characteristic all his life and it did not abandon him at the
end. `First, tell me why you need the crystal so?'
    `You see this web? It reproduces the patterns of my
brain. One perfect crystal is missing from the design. The
crystal which you stole! It is unique, and irreplaceable.'
    The immense concentration of the blue crystal
vibrations was sapping the Doctor's mind and destroying
his body. He knew he could not last much longer. `When
the crystal web is complete ­ what then?' he asked weakly.
    The Great One's voice was exultant. `My every thought
will resonate within the web. My mind will grow and grow
in power ­ forever!'
    `Don't you see?' shouted the Doctor desperately. `You've
built a positive feedback circuit. You're trying to increase
your mental powers to infinity!'
    `Exactly. I shall be the Ruler of the entire Universe.'
   `Listen to me please,' begged the Doctor. `I haven't very
much time. If you complete that circuit, the energy will
build up and up until you can no longer contain it. You
will literally destroy yourself. You will explode your mind!'
   `You waste the little time that is left to you,' said the
Great One disdainfully. `I will grant you one last favour.
You may watch the completion of my triumph while you
die.'
   The blue crystal was plucked from the Doctor's hand. It
floated gently across the cave and filled the one remaining
gap in the crystal web which had waited for it so long. The
Great One gave a shriek of triumph. `I am complete. Now I
am total power. All praise to the Great One!'
   The Doctor, now very weak, watched helplessly as his
prophetic warning came true. The crystal web began to
glow, brighter and brighter. The walls of the Crystal Cave
seemed to be on fire. The shrieks of the Great One echoed
around the Cave. `ALL PRAISE TO THE GREAT ONE.
ALL PRAISE TO ME. ON YOUR KNEES, MORTALS.
BOW DOWN BEFORE ME PLANETS. BOW DOWN O
STARS. BOW DOWN O GALAXIES, AND WORSHIP
THE GREAT ONE, THE ME THE GREAT ALL-
POWERFUL ME!'
   Suddenly a scream of pain filled the cave. `I AM HURT.
I AM BURNING, MY BRAIN IS ON FIRE. HELP ME!'
   The crystal web was white hot now, and the body of the
Great One was incandescent, as she writhed and twisted in
agony. The Doctor knew there was no hope for him now.
He had been too long in the cave. He decided that he did
not particularly want to spend whatever time was left to
him in watching the Great One die. He turned and
stumbled away.
   The final throes of the Great One were the death knell
of all the Giant Spiders of Metebelis Three. Their minds
linked in some mystic way to hers, they died as she died.
   In the hidden Council Chamber Arak and Tuar
suddenly felt themselves wake up. All around them Spiders
were twisting and dying. `We are free,' said Arak. `Come,
my brother.' They turned and ran from the chamber. The
whole mountain was shaking now as if in an earthquake.
At last, they gained the open air and ran down the
mountainside to where their followers stood waiting. Arak,
his brother, and their little army looked on from a safe
distance as the mountain of blue crystals exploded in a
mass of flames. When it was over at last, they turned and
made their way back to the villages. Tomorrow would
indeed be a new dawn for Metebelis Three. The dawn of
freedom.

In the cellar of the monastery, Barnes and his group waited
for instructions which never came. Instead, Spiders
appeared one by one upon their backs, dropped to the
ground and withered away to nothingness. The four men
looked at each other in sudden horror and disgust. Barnes
began to sob...

In the heart of the exploding mountain, the Doctor ran
alone along endless tunnels. At last he saw the one thing he
was looking for ­ the solid blue shape of the TARDIS.
Fearful that it might be a mirage, he gathered the last
remnants of his strength and stumbled towards it.
                  Epilogue
            An End and a Beginning
Sarah Jane Smith stood and looked round the Doctor's
laboratory. You could tell he wasn't there, she thought, by
the fact that the place was so abnormally tidy: all the
tangles of equipment cleared away, laboratory benches bare
and polished stools ranged neatly along the wall. Perhaps
the most noticeable change of all was the empty space in
the corner where the TARDIS usually stood. One of the
Doctor's old cloaks hung from the peg behind the door.
Sarah held it to her cheek for a moment, then turned away.
    Beside her the Brigadier cleared his throat. `Like to
keep the place standing by, you know. Just in case the old
fellow turns up to use it.'
    Sarah said `He's been gone for over three weeks now.'
    `That's nothing,' said the Brigadier stoutly. `After the
first time I met him, we didn't meet again for some years.
And then he turned up with a completely different face.'
The Brigadier still sounded a little aggrieved.
    `He knew if he went back there he'd destroy himself,'
Sarah went on bleakly. `We might as well face it, Brigadier,
we'll never see him again.'
    The Brigadier made no comment. He didn't really know
what had happened to the Doctor and Sarah on Metebelis
Three, and didn't see much point in finding out. He'd paid
a lightning visit to the monastery, when it was all over, and
found Yates and Sarah badly shaken and four chaps with
complete nervous breakdowns who'd had to be carted off
in ambulances. A man called Lupton was missing. There
was also some story about the Abbot disappearing, but
since no one seemed very sure if he'd ever been there in the
first place, the Brigadier proposed to let that one strictly
alone. Oh yes, and there was that fellow Tommy. Sarah had
made the Brigadier promise to use his influence to get him
a place at University.
    Remembering Sarah's feelings, the Brigadier made
another valiant effort to console her. `Thing is, Miss Smith,
the Doctor's a very resilient chap ­ I remember once...'
    A wheezing, groaning sound filled the laboratory. The
TARDIS began to materialise in its usual corner. Once it
was solidly there, the Doctor staggered out and collapsed at
their feet.
    Sarah and the Brigadier made the transition from joy to
sorrow in an instant. The Doctor looked ­ the only word
was deathly. Like the ghost of his former self. It seemed as
if the very fabric of his body had been eroded away. He sat
up and looked at them with an apologetic grin.. `Sorry to
be so long... lost in the Time Vortex. TARDIS brought me
home.' He gave the TARDIS an affectionate pat, and fell
back on the floor. Sarah kneeled beside him, cradling his
head in her lap. She began to sob gently, and a tear
splashed on to the end of the Doctor's nose. His eyes
flickered open. `Tears, Sarah Jane? You mustn't cry.
Remember, while there's life there's...' The Doctor's eyes
closed again and his head fell back.
    The Brigadier said quickly, `I'll get the M.O. May still
be something...' He made for the phone.
    `Too late, Brigadier. He's dead.'
    `Oh no!' said a voice behind her. `He is not dead, my
dear young lady.'
    Sarah turned and saw Cho-Je. She jumped to her feet,
noticing with no feeling of surprise that he was sitting
cross-legged in mid-air about three feet above the ground.
    `Oh dear,' she said to no one in particular. `I don't think
I can take much more.'
    The Brigadier looked at Cho-Je severely, as if wondering
how he'd slipped into the building without a pass. `Won't
you introduce me to your friend, Miss Smith?'
    Sarah said helplessly, `Well, it's Cho-Je. That is, it looks
like Cho-Je but it's really K'anpo Rinpoche ­ I think.'
    `Thank you,' said the Brigadier. `That makes every-
thing quite clear.'
    Sarah looked up at Cho-Je and said, `You're sure he isn't
dead?'
    Cho-Je nodded. `All the cells of his body have been
devastated by the Metebelis crystals. But remember, he is a
Time Lord. If I give the process a little ­ ah ­ a little push,
so to speak, the cells will regenerate. He will be a new
man!'
    `Literally?' asked the Brigadier, with a certain amount
of foreboding.
    Cho-Je smiled. `Well of course he is bound to look
different.'
    The Brigadier sighed. `Not again.'
    And there was more to come. Cho-Je said, `The change
will shake up the brain cells a little. You may find him
rather erratic at first. But he'll settle down.'
    Sarah looked worriedly at the Doctor as he lay on the
floor. `And when is all this going to happen?'
    Cho-Je chuckled. `Well, there's no time like the present
is there? Goodbye ­ look after him.' And he faded away as
silently as he had appeared.
    `Now wait a moment,' said the Brigadier firmly. His
voice tailed off as he realised he was addressing empty
space.
    `Brigadier, look!' said Sarah. `It's starting.'
    A golden glow was appearing round the Doctor's body.
Even as they watched, the features began to blur and
change. `Well bless my soul,' said the Brigadier. `Here we
go again!'
